
CHAPTER I

EARLY RECOLLECTIONS

 Extraction--“H. B.”--Four Remarkable Brothers--My Mother’s Family
 Tree--An Unrecognized Genius--My First Knockout--Thackeray--The
 Fenians--Early Reading--My First Story.


I was born on May 22, 1859, at Picardy Place, Edinburgh, so named
because in old days a colony of French Huguenots had settled there. At
the time of their coming it was a village outside the City walls, but
now it is at the end of Queen Street, abutting upon Leith Walk. When
last I visited it, it seemed to have degenerated, but at that time the
flats were of good repute.

My father was the youngest son of John Doyle, who under the _nom de
crayon_ of “H. B.” made a great reputation in London from about 1825 to
1850. He came from Dublin about the year 1815 and may be said to be the
father of polite caricature, for in the old days satire took the brutal
shape of making the object grotesque in features and figure. Gilray and
Rowlandson had no other idea. My grandfather was a gentleman, drawing
gentlemen for gentlemen, and the satire lay in the wit of the picture
and not in the misdrawing of faces. This was a new idea, but it has
been followed by most caricaturists since and so has become familiar.
There were no comic papers in those days, and the weekly cartoon of
“H. B.” was lithographed and distributed. He exerted, I am told, quite
an influence upon politics, and was on terms of intimacy with many of
the leading men of the day. I can remember him in his old age, a very
handsome and dignified man with features of the strong Anglo-Irish,
Duke of Wellington stamp. He died in 1868.

My grandfather was left a widower with a numerous family, of which
four boys and one girl survived. Each of the boys made a name for
himself, for all inherited the artistic powers of their father. The
elder, James Doyle, wrote “The Chronicles of England,” illustrated
with coloured pictures by himself--examples of colour-printing which
beat any subsequent work that I have ever seen. He also spent thirteen
years in doing “The Official Baronage of England,” a wonderful monument
of industry and learning. Another brother was Henry Doyle, a great
judge of old paintings, and in later years the manager of the National
Gallery in Dublin, where he earned his C.B. The third son was Richard
Doyle, whose whimsical humour made him famous in “Punch,” the cover of
which with its dancing elves is still so familiar an object. Finally
came Charles Doyle, my father.

The Doyle family seem to have been fairly well-to-do, thanks to my
grandfather’s talents. They lived in London in Cambridge Terrace. A
sketch of their family life is given in “Dicky Doyle’s Diary.” They
lived up to their income, however, and it became necessary to find
places for the boys. When my father was only nineteen a seat was
offered him in the Government Office of Works in Edinburgh, whither he
went. There he spent his working life, and thus it came about that I,
an Irishman by extraction, was born in the Scottish capital.

The Doyles, Anglo-Norman in origin, were strong Roman Catholics. The
original Doyle, or D’Oil, was a cadet-branch of the Staffordshire
Doyles, which has produced Sir Francis Hastings Doyle and many other
distinguished men. This cadet shared in the invasion of Ireland and
was granted estates in County Wexford, where a great clan rose of
dependants, illegitimate children and others, all taking the feudal
lord’s name, just as the de Burghs founded the clan of Burke. We can
only claim to be the main stem by virtue of community of character and
appearance with the English Doyles and the unbroken use of the same
crest and coat-of-arms.

My forbears, like most old Irish families in the south, kept to the
old faith at the Reformation and fell victims to the penal laws in
consequence. These became so crushing upon landed gentry that my
great-grandfather was driven from his estate and became a silk-mercer
in Dublin, where “H. B.” was born. This family record was curiously
confirmed by Monsignor Barry Doyle, destined, I think, for the highest
honours of the Roman Church, who traces back to the younger brother of
my great-grandfather.

I trust the reader will indulge me in my excursion into these family
matters, which are of vital interest to the family, but must be tedious
to the outsider. As I am on the subject, I wish to say a word upon my
mother’s family, the more so as she was great on archaeology, and had,
with the help of Sir Arthur Vicars, Ulster King of Arms, and himself a
relative, worked out her descent for more than five hundred years, and
so composed a family tree which lies before me as I write and on which
many of the great ones of the earth have roosted.

Her father was a young doctor of Trinity College, William Foley, who
died young and left his family in comparative poverty. He had married
one Katherine Pack, whose death-bed--or rather the white waxen thing
which lay upon that bed--is the very earliest recollection of my life.
Her near relative--uncle, I think--was Sir Denis Pack, who led the
Scottish brigade at Waterloo. The Packs were a fighting family, as was
but right since they were descended in a straight line from a major in
Cromwell’s army who settled in Ireland. One of them, Anthony Pack, had
part of his head carried off at the same battle, so I fear it is part
of our family tradition that we lose our heads in action. His brain was
covered over by a silver plate and he lived for many years, subject
only to very bad fits of temper, which some of us have had with less
excuse.

But the real romance of the family lies in the fact that about the
middle of the seventeenth century the Reverend Richard Pack, who was
head of Kilkenny College, married Mary Percy, who was heir to the Irish
branch of the Percys of Northumberland. By this alliance we all connect
up (and I have every generation by name, as marked out by my dear
mother) with that illustrious line up to three separate marriages with
the Plantagenets. One has, therefore, some strange strains in one’s
blood which are noble in origin and, one can but hope, are noble in
tendency.

But all this romance of ancestry did not interfere with the fact that
when Katherine Pack, the Irish gentlewoman, came in her widowhood
to Edinburgh, she was very poor. I have never been clear why it was
Edinburgh for which she made. Having taken a flat she let it be known
that a paying-guest would be welcome. Just at this time, 1850 or
thereabouts, Charles Doyle was sent from London with a recommendation
to the priests that they should guard his young morals and budding
faith. How could they do this better than by finding him quarters with
a well-born and orthodox widow? Thus it came about that two separate
lines of Irish wanderers came together under one roof.

I have a little bundle of my father’s letters written in those
days, full of appreciation of the kindness which he met with and
full, also, of interesting observations on that Scottish society,
rough, hard-drinking and kindly, into which he had been precipitated
at a dangerously early age, especially for one with his artistic
temperament. He had some fine religious instincts, but his environment
was a difficult one. In the household was a bright-eyed, very
intelligent younger daughter, Mary, who presently went off to France
and returned as a very cultivated young woman. The romance is easily
understood, and so Charles Doyle in the year 1855 married Mary Foley,
my mother, the young couple still residing with my grandmother.

Their means were limited, for his salary as a Civil Servant was not
more than about £240. This he supplemented by his drawings. Thus
matters remained for practically all his life, for he was quite
unambitious and no great promotion ever came his way. His painting was
done spasmodically and the family did not always reap the benefit,
for Edinburgh is full of water-colours which he had given away. It is
one of my unfulfilled schemes to collect as many as possible and to
have a Charles Doyle exhibition in London, for the critics would be
surprised to find what a great and original artist he was--far the
greatest, in my opinion, of the family. His brush was concerned not
only with fairies and delicate themes of the kind, but with wild and
fearsome subjects, so that his work had a very peculiar style of its
own, mitigated by great natural humour. He was more terrible than Blake
and less morbid than Wiertz. His originality is best shown by the fact
that one hardly knows with whom to compare him. In prosaic Scotland,
however, he excited wonder rather than admiration, and he was only
known in the larger world of London by pen and ink book-illustrations
which were not his best mode of expression. The prosaic outcome was
that including all his earnings my mother could never have averaged
more than £300 a year on which to educate a large family. We lived in
the hardy and bracing atmosphere of poverty and we each in turn did our
best to help those who were younger than ourselves. My noble sister
Annette, who died just as the sunshine of better days came into our
lives, went out at a very early age as a governess to Portugal and
sent all her salary home. My younger sisters, Lottie and Connie, both
did the same thing; and I helped as I could. But it was still my dear
mother who bore the long, sordid strain. Often I said to her, “When you
are old, Mammie, you shall have a velvet dress and gold glasses and sit
in comfort by the fire.” Thank God, it so came to pass. My father, I
fear, was of little help to her, for his thoughts were always in the
clouds and he had no appreciation of the realities of life. The world,
not the family, gets the fruits of genius.

Of my boyhood I need say little, save that it was Spartan at home
and more Spartan at the Edinburgh school where a tawse-brandishing
schoolmaster of the old type made our young lives miserable. From the
age of seven to nine I suffered under this pock-marked, one-eyed rascal
who might have stepped from the pages of Dickens. In the evenings home
and books were my sole consolation, save for week-end holidays. My
comrades were rough boys and I became a rough boy, too. If there is any
truth in the idea of reincarnation--a point on which my mind is still
open--I think some earlier experience of mine must have been as a stark
fighter, for it came out strongly in youth, when I rejoiced in battle.
We lived for some time in a _cul de sac_ street with a very vivid
life of its own and a fierce feud between the small boys who dwelt on
either side of it. Finally it was fought out between two champions, I
representing the poorer boys who lived in flats and my opponent the
richer boys who lived in the opposite villas. We fought in the garden
of one of the said villas and had an excellent contest of many rounds,
not being strong enough to weaken each other. When I got home after
the battle, my mother cried, “Oh, Arthur, what a dreadful eye you
have got!” To which I replied, “You just go across and look at Eddie
Tulloch’s eye!”

I met a well-deserved setback on one occasion when I stood forward to
fight a bootmaker’s boy, who had come into our preserve upon an errand.
He had a green baize bag in his hand which contained a heavy boot, and
this he swung against my skull with a force which knocked me pretty
well senseless. It was a useful lesson. I will say for myself, however,
that though I was pugnacious I was never so to those weaker than myself
and that some of my escapades were in the defence of such. As I will
show in my chapter on Sport, I carried on my tastes into a later period
of my life.

One or two little pictures stand out which may be worth recording.
When my grandfather’s grand London friends passed through Edinburgh
they used, to our occasional embarrassment, to call at the little flat
“to see how Charles is getting on.” In my earliest childhood such a
one came, tall, white-haired and affable. I was so young that it seems
like a faint dream, and yet it pleases me to think that I have sat on
Thackeray’s knee. He greatly admired my dear little mother with her
grey Irish eyes and her vivacious Celtic ways--indeed, no one met her
without being captivated by her.

Once, too, I got a glimpse of history. It was in 1866, if my dates are
right, that some well-to-do Irish relatives asked us over for a few
weeks, and we passed that time in a great house in King’s County. I
spent much of it with the horses and dogs, and became friendly with the
young groom. The stables opened on to a country road by an arched gate
with a loft over it. One morning, being in the yard, I saw the young
groom rush into the yard with every sign of fear and hastily shut and
bar the doors. He then climbed into the loft, beckoning to me to come
with him. From the loft window we saw a gang of rough men, twenty or
so, slouching along the road. When they came opposite to the gate they
stopped and looking up shook their fists and cursed at us. The groom
answered back most volubly. Afterwards I understood that these men
were a party of Fenians, and that I had had a glimpse of one of the
periodical troubles which poor old Ireland has endured. Perhaps now, at
last, they may be drawing to an end.

During these first ten years I was a rapid reader, so rapid that some
small library with which we dealt gave my mother notice that books
would not be changed more than twice a day. My tastes were boylike
enough, for Mayne Reid was my favourite author, and his “Scalp Hunters”
my favourite book. I wrote a little book and illustrated it myself in
early days. There was a man in it and there was a tiger who amalgamated
shortly after they met. I remarked to my mother with precocious wisdom
that it was easy to get people into scrapes, but not so easy to get
them out again, which is surely the experience of every writer of
adventures.




CHAPTER II

UNDER THE JESUITS

 The Preparatory School--The Mistakes of Education--Spartan
 Schooling--Corporal Punishment--Well-known School Fellows--Gloomy
 Forecasts--Poetry--London Matriculation--German School--A Happy
 Year--The Jesuits--Strange Arrival in Paris.


I was in my tenth year when I was sent to Hodder, which is the
preparatory school for Stonyhurst, the big Roman Catholic public school
in Lancashire. It was a long journey for a little boy who had never
been away from home before, and I felt very lonesome and wept bitterly
upon the way, but in due time I arrived safely at Preston, which was
then the nearest station, and with many other small boys and our
black-robed Jesuit guardians we drove some twelve miles to the school.
Hodder is about a mile from Stonyhurst, and as all the boys there are
youngsters under twelve, it forms a very useful institution, breaking a
lad into school ways before he mixes with the big fellows.

I had two years at Hodder. The year was not broken up by the frequent
holidays which illuminate the present educational period. Save for
six weeks each summer, one never left the school. On the whole, those
first two years were happy years. I could hold my own both in brain
and in strength with my comrades. I was fortunate enough to get under
the care of a kindly principal, one Father Cassidy, who was more human
than Jesuits usually are. I have always kept a warm remembrance of
this man and of his gentle ways to the little boys--young rascals many
of us--who were committed to his care. I remember the Franco-German
War breaking out at this period, and how it made a ripple even in our
secluded back-water.

From Hodder I passed on to Stonyhurst, that grand mediæval
dwelling-house which was left some hundred and fifty years ago to the
Jesuits, who brought over their whole teaching staff from some college
in Holland in order to carry it on as a public school. The general
curriculum, like the building, was mediæval but sound. I understand it
has been modernized since. There were seven classes--elements, figures,
rudiments, grammar, syntax, poetry and rhetoric--and you were allotted
a year for each, or seven in all--a course with which I faithfully
complied, two having already been completed at Hodder. It was the usual
public school routine of Euclid, algebra and the classics, taught in
the usual way, which is calculated to leave a lasting abhorrence of
these subjects. To give boys a little slab of Virgil or Homer with
no general idea as to what it is all about or what the classical age
was like, is surely an absurd way of treating the subject. I am sure
that an intelligent boy could learn more by reading a good translation
of Homer for a week than by a year’s study of the original as it is
usually carried out. It was no worse at Stonyhurst than at any other
school, and it can only be excused on the plea that any exercise,
however stupid in itself, forms a sort of mental dumb-bell by which one
can improve one’s mind. It is, I think, a thoroughly false theory. I
can say with truth that my Latin and Greek, which cost me so many weary
hours, have been little use to me in life, and that my mathematics have
been no use at all. On the other hand, some things which I picked up
almost by accident, the art of reading aloud, learned when my mother
was knitting, or the reading of French books, learned by spelling
out the captions of the Jules Verne illustrations, have been of the
greatest possible service. My classical education left me with a horror
of the classics, and I was astonished to find how fascinating they were
when I read them in a reasonable manner in later years.

Year by year, then, I see myself climbing those seven weary steps and
passing through as many stages of my boyhood. I do not know if the
Jesuit system of education is good or not; I would need to have tried
another system as well before I could answer that. On the whole it
was justified by results, for I think it turned out as decent a set
of young fellows as any other school would do. In spite of a large
infusion of foreigners and some disaffected Irish, we were a patriotic
crowd, and our little pulse beat time with the heart of the nation.
I am told that the average of V.C.’s and D.S.O.’s now held by old
Stonyhurst boys is very high as compared with other schools. The Jesuit
teachers have no trust in human nature, and perhaps they are justified.
We were never allowed for an instant to be alone with each other, and
I think that the immorality which is rife in public schools was at a
minimum in consequence. In our games and our walks the priests always
took part, and a master perambulated the dormitories at night. Such a
system may weaken self-respect and self-help, but it at least minimizes
temptation and scandal.

The life was Spartan, and yet we had all that was needed. Dry bread
and hot well-watered milk were our frugal breakfast. There was a
“joint” and twice a week a pudding for dinner. Then there was an odd
snack called “bread and beer” in the afternoon, a bit of dry bread
and the most extraordinary drink, which was brown but had no other
characteristic of beer. Finally, there was hot milk again, bread,
butter, and often potatoes for supper. We were all very healthy on this
_régime_, on Fridays. Everything in every way was plain to the verge
of austerity, save that we dwelt in a beautiful building, dined in a
marble-floored hall with minstrels’ gallery, prayed in a lovely church,
and generally lived in very choice surroundings so far as vision and
not comfort was concerned.

Corporal punishment was severe, and I can speak with feeling as I think
few, if any, boys of my time endured more of it. It was of a peculiar
nature, imported also, I fancy, from Holland. The instrument was a
piece of india-rubber of the size and shape of a thick boot sole. This
was called a “Tolley”--why, no one has explained, unless it is a Latin
pun on what we had to bear. One blow of this instrument, delivered with
intent, would cause the palm of the hand to swell up and change colour.
When I say that the usual punishment of the larger boys was nine on
each hand, and that nine on one hand was the absolute minimum, it will
be understood that it was a severe ordeal, and that the sufferer could
not, as a rule, turn the handle of the door to get out of the room in
which he had suffered. To take twice nine upon a cold day was about
the extremity of human endurance. I think, however, that it was good
for us in the end, for it was a point of honour with many of us not
to show that we were hurt, and that is one of the best trainings for a
hard life. If I was more beaten than others it was not that I was in
any way vicious, but it was that I had a nature which responded eagerly
to affectionate kindness (which I never received), but which rebelled
against threats and took a perverted pride in showing that it would not
be cowed by violence. I went out of my way to do really mischievous and
outrageous things simply to show that my spirit was unbroken. An appeal
to my better nature and not to my fears would have found an answer at
once. I deserved all I got for what I did, but I did it because I was
mishandled.

I do not remember any one who attained particular distinction among my
school-fellows, save Bernard Partridge of “Punch,” whom I recollect
as a very quiet, gentle boy. Father Thurston, who was destined to be
one of my opponents in psychic matters so many years later, was in
the class above me. There was a young novice, too, with whom I hardly
came in contact, but whose handsome and spiritual appearance I well
remember. He was Bernard Vaughan, afterwards the famous preacher. Save
for one school-fellow, James Ryan--a remarkable boy who grew into a
remarkable man--I carried away no lasting friendship from Stonyhurst.

It was only in the latest stage of my Stonyhurst development that I
realized that I had some literary streak in me which was not common to
all. It came to me as quite a surprise, and even more perhaps to my
masters, who had taken a rather hopeless view of my future prospects.
One master, when I told him that I thought of being a civil engineer,
remarked, “Well, Doyle, you may be an engineer, but I don’t think you
will ever be a civil one.” Another assured me that I would never do
any good in the world, and perhaps from his point of view his prophecy
has been justified. The particular incident, however, which brought
my latent powers to the surface depended upon the fact that in the
second highest class, which I reached in 1874, it was incumbent to
write poetry (so called) on any theme given. This was done as a dreary
unnatural task by most boys. Very comical their wooings of the muses
used to be. For one saturated as I really was with affection for
verse, it was a labour of love, and I produced verses which were poor
enough in themselves but seemed miracles to those who had no urge in
that direction. The particular theme was the crossing of the Red Sea by
the Israelites and my effort from--

    “Like pallid daisies in a grassy wood,
    So round the sward the tents of Israel stood”;

through--

    “There was no time for thought and none for fear,
    For Egypt’s horse already pressed their rear.”

down to the climax--

    “One horrid cry! The tragedy was o’er,
    And Pharaoh with his army seen no more,”--

was workmanlike though wooden and conventional. Anyhow, it marked what
Mr. Stead used to call a signpost, and I realized myself a little. In
the last year I edited the College magazine and wrote a good deal of
indifferent verse. I also went up for the Matriculation examination of
London University, a good all-round test which winds up the Stonyhurst
curriculum, and I surprised every one by taking honours, so after all
I emerged from Stonyhurst at the age of sixteen with more credit than
seemed probable from my rather questionable record.

Early in my career there, an offer had been made to my mother that my
school fees would be remitted if I were dedicated to the Church. She
refused this, so both the Church and I had an escape. When I think,
however, of her small income and great struggle to keep up appearances
and make both ends meet, it was a fine example of her independence of
character, for it meant paying out some £50 a year which might have
been avoided by a word of assent.

[Illustration: MY MOTHER, AT 17.

_Drawn by Richard Doyle, July 1854._]

I had yet another year with the Jesuits, for it was determined that
I was still too young to begin any professional studies, and that I
should go to Germany and learn German. I was despatched, therefore,
to Feldkirch, which is a Jesuit school in the Vorarlberg province of
Austria, to which many better-class German boys are sent. Here the
conditions were much more humane and I met with far more human kindness
than at Stonyhurst, with the immediate result that I ceased to be a
resentful young rebel and became a pillar of law and order.

I began badly, however, for on the first night of my arrival I was kept
awake by a boy snoring loudly in the dormitory. I stood it as long as
I could, but at last I was driven to action. Curious wooden compasses
called _bett-scheere_, or “bed-scissors,” were stuck into each side of
the narrow beds. One of these I plucked out, walked down the dormitory,
and, having spotted the offender, proceeded to poke him with my stick.
He awoke and was considerably amazed to see in the dim light a large
youth whom he had never seen before--I arrived after hours--assaulting
him with a club. I was still engaged in stirring him up when I felt
a touch on my shoulder and was confronted by the master, who ordered
me back to bed. Next morning I got a lecture on free-and-easy English
ways, and taking the law into my own hands. But this start was really
my worst lapse and I did well in the future.

It was a happy year on the whole. I made less progress with German
than I should, for there were about twenty English and Irish boys who
naturally balked the wishes of their parents by herding together. There
was no cricket, but there were toboganning and fair football and a
weird game--football on stilts. Then there were the lovely mountains
round us, with an occasional walk among them. The food was better than
at Stonyhurst and we had the pleasant German light beer instead of
the horrible swipes of Stonyhurst. One unlooked-for accomplishment I
acquired, for the boy who played the big brass bass instrument in the
fine school band had not returned, and, as a well-grown lad was needed,
I was at once enlisted in the service. I played in public--good music,
too, “Lohengrin,” and “Tannhäuser,”--within a week or two of my first
lesson, but they pressed me on for the occasion and the Bombardon, as
it was called, only comes in on a measured rhythm with an occasional
run, which sounds like a hippopotamus doing a step-dance. So big was
the instrument that I remember the other bandsmen putting my sheets and
blankets inside it and my surprise when I could not get out a note. It
was in the summer of 1876 that I left Feldkirch, and I have always had
a pleasant memory of the Austrian Jesuits and of the old schools.

Indeed I have a kindly feeling towards all Jesuits, far as I have
strayed from their paths. I see now both their limitations and their
virtues. They have been slandered in some things, for during eight
years of constant contact I cannot remember that they were less
truthful than their fellows, or more casuistical than their neighbours.
They were keen, clean-minded earnest men, so far as I knew them, with a
few black sheep among them, but not many, for the process of selection
was careful and long. In all ways, save in their theology, they were
admirable, though this same theology made them hard and inhuman upon
the surface, which is indeed the general effect of Catholicism in its
more extreme forms. The convert is lost to the family. Their hard,
narrow outlook gives the Jesuits driving power, as is noticeable in the
Puritans and all hard, narrow creeds. They are devoted and fearless and
have again and again, both in Canada, in South America and in China,
been the vanguard of civilization to their own grievous hurt. They
are the old guard of the Roman Church. But the tragedy is that they,
who would gladly give their lives for the old faith, have in effect
helped to ruin it, for it is they, according to Father Tyrrell and the
modernists, who have been at the back of all those extreme doctrines
of papal infallibility and Immaculate Conception, with a general
all-round tightening of dogma, which have made it so difficult for the
man with scientific desire for truth or with intellectual self-respect
to keep within the Church. For some years Sir Charles Mivart, the last
of Catholic Scientists, tried to do the impossible, and then he also
had to leave go his hold, so that there is not, so far as I know,
one single man of outstanding fame in science or in general thought
who is a practising Catholic. This is the work of the extremists and
is deplored by many of the moderates and fiercely condemned by the
modernists. It depends also upon the inner Italian directorate who
give the orders. Nothing can exceed the uncompromising bigotry of
the Jesuit theology, or their apparent ignorance of how it shocks
the modern conscience. I remember that when, as a grown lad, I heard
Father Murphy, a great fierce Irish priest, declare that there was sure
damnation for every one outside the Church, I looked upon him with
horror, and to that moment I trace the first rift which has grown into
such a chasm between me and those who were my guides.

On my way back to England I stopped at Paris. Through all my life
up to this point there had been an unseen granduncle, named Michael
Conan, to whom I must now devote a paragraph. He came into the family
from the fact that my father’s father (“H. B.”) had married a Miss
Conan. Michael Conan, her brother, had been editor of “The Art Journal”
and was a man of distinction, an intellectual Irishman of the type
which originally founded the Sinn Fein movement. He was as keen on
heraldry and genealogy as my mother, and he traced his descent in some
circuitous way from the Dukes of Brittany, who were all Conans; indeed
Arthur Conan was the ill-fated young Duke whose eyes were put out,
according to Shakespeare, by King John. This uncle was my godfather,
and hence my name Arthur Conan.

He lived in Paris and had expressed a wish that his grandnephew and
godson, with whom he had corresponded, should call _en passant_. I ran
my money affairs so closely, after a rather lively supper at Strasburg,
that when I reached Paris I had just twopence in my pocket. As I could
not well drive up and ask my uncle to pay the cab I left my trunk at
the station and set forth on foot. I reached the river, walked along
it, came to the foot of the Champs Élysées, saw the Arc de Triomphe in
the distance, and then, knowing that the Avenue Wagram, where my uncle
lived, was near there, I tramped it on a hot August day and finally
found him. I remember that I was exhausted with the heat and the
walking, and that when at the last gasp I saw a man buy a drink of what
seemed to be porter by handing a penny to a man who had a long tin on
his back, I therefore halted the man and spent one of my pennies on a
duplicate drink. It proved to be liquorice and water, but it revived
me when I badly needed it, and it could not be said that I arrived
penniless at my uncle’s, for I actually had a penny.

So, for some penurious weeks, I was in Paris with this dear old
volcanic Irishman, who spent the summer day in his shirt-sleeves, with
a little dicky-bird of a wife waiting upon him. I am built rather on
his lines of body and mind than on any of the Doyles. We made a true
friendship, and then I returned to my home conscious that real life was
about to begin.




CHAPTER III

RECOLLECTIONS OF A STUDENT

 Edinburgh University--A Sad Disappointment--Original of Professor
 Challenger--Of Sherlock Holmes--Deductions--Sheffield--Ruyton--
 Birmingham--Literary Aspirations--First Accepted Story--My Father’s
 Death--Mental Position--Spiritual Yearnings--An Awkward Business.


When I returned to Edinburgh, with little to show, either mental or
spiritual, for my pleasant school year in Germany, I found that the
family affairs were still as straitened as ever. No promotion had come
to my father, and two younger children, Innes, my only brother, and
Ida, had arrived to add to the calls upon my mother. Another sister,
Julia, followed shortly afterwards. But Annette, the eldest sister, had
already gone out to Portugal to earn and send home a fair salary, while
Lottie and Connie were about to do the same. My mother had adopted the
device of sharing a large house, which may have eased her in some ways,
but was disastrous in others.

Perhaps it was good for me that the times were hard, for I was wild,
full-blooded, and a trifle reckless, but the situation called for
energy and application, so that one was bound to try to meet it.
My mother had been so splendid that we could not fail her. It had
been determined that I should be a doctor, chiefly, I think, because
Edinburgh was so famous a centre for medical learning. It meant another
long effort for my mother, but she was very brave and ambitious where
her children were concerned, and I was not only to have a medical
education, but to take the University degree, which was a larger matter
than a mere licence to practise. When I returned from Germany I found
that there was a long list of bursaries and scholarships open for
competition. I had a month in which to brush up my classics and then I
went in for these, and was informed a week later that I had won the
Grierson bursary of £40 for two years. Great were the rejoicings and
all shadows seemed to be lifting. But on calling to get the money I was
informed that there had been a clerical error, and that this particular
bursary was only open to arts students. As there was a long list of
prizes I naturally supposed that I would get the next highest, which
was available for medicals. The official pulled a long face and said:
“Unfortunately the candidate to whom it was allotted has already drawn
the money.” It was manifest robbery, and yet I, who had won the prize
and needed it so badly, never received it, and was eventually put off
with a solatium of £7, which had accumulated from some fund. It was
a bitter disappointment and, of course, I had a legal case, but what
can a penniless student do, and what sort of college career would he
have if he began it by suing his University for money? I was advised
to accept the situation, and there seemed no prospect of accepting
anything else.

So now behold me, a tall strongly-framed but half-formed young man,
fairly entered upon my five years’ course of medical study. It can be
done with diligence in four years, but there came, as I shall show, a
glorious interruption which held me back for one year. I entered as a
student in October 1876, and I emerged as a Bachelor of Medicine in
August 1881. Between these two points lies one long weary grind at
botany, chemistry, anatomy, physiology, and a whole list of compulsory
subjects, many of which have a very indirect bearing upon the art of
curing. The whole system of teaching, as I look back upon it, seems
far too oblique and not nearly practical enough for the purpose in
view. And yet Edinburgh is, I believe, more practical than most other
colleges. It is practical, too, in its preparation for life, since
there is none of the atmosphere of an enlarged public school, as is the
case in English Universities, but the student lives a free man in his
own rooms with no restrictions of any sort. It ruins some and makes
strong men of many. In my own case, of course, this did not apply,
since my family lived in the town, and I worked from my own home.

There was no attempt at friendship, or even acquaintance, between
professors and students at Edinburgh. It was a strictly business
arrangement by which you paid, for example, four guineas for Anatomy
lectures and received the winter course in exchange, never seeing
your professor save behind his desk and never under any circumstances
exchanging a word with him. They were remarkable men, however, some
of these professors, and we managed to know them pretty well without
any personal acquaintance. There was kindly Crum Brown, the chemist,
who sheltered himself carefully before exploding some mixture, which
usually failed to ignite, so that the loud “Boom!” uttered by the class
was the only resulting sound. Brown would emerge from his retreat with
a “Really, gentlemen!” of remonstrance, and go on without allusion to
the abortive experiment. There was Wyville Thomson, the zoologist,
fresh from his _Challenger_ expedition, and Balfour, with the face and
manner of John Knox, a hard rugged old man, who harried the students in
their exams, and was in consequence harried by them for the rest of the
year. There was Turner, a fine anatomist, but a self-educated man, as
was betrayed when he used to “take and put this structure on the handle
of this scalpel.” The most human trait that I can recall of Turner was
that upon one occasion the sacred quadrangle was invaded by snowballing
roughs. His class, of whom I was one, heard the sounds of battle
and fidgeted in their seats, on which the Professor said: “I think,
gentlemen, your presence may be more useful outside than here,” on
which we flocked out with a whoop, and soon had the quadrangle clear.
Most vividly of all, however, there stands out in my memory the squat
figure of Professor Rutherford with his Assyrian beard, his prodigious
voice, his enormous chest and his singular manner. He fascinated and
awed us. I have endeavoured to reproduce some of his peculiarities in
the fictitious character of Professor Challenger. He would sometimes
start his lecture before he reached the classroom, so that we would
hear a booming voice saying: “There are valves in the veins,” or some
other information, when the desk was still empty. He was, I fear, a
rather ruthless vivisector, and though I have always recognized that a
minimum of painless vivisection is necessary, and far more justifiable
than the eating of meat as a food, I am glad that the law was made more
stringent so as to restrain such men as he. “Ach, these Jarman Frags!”
he would exclaim in his curious accent, as he tore some poor amphibian
to pieces. I wrote a students’ song which is still sung, I understand,
in which a curious article is picked up on the Portobello beach and
each Professor in turn claims it for his department. Rutherford’s verse
ran:

    Said Rutherford with a smile,
    “It’s a mass of solid bile,
      And I myself obtained it, what is more,
    By a stringent cholagogue
    From a vivisected dog,
      And I lost it on the Portobello Shore.”

If the song is indeed still sung it may be of interest to the present
generation to know that I was the author.

But the most notable of the characters whom I met was one Joseph Bell,
surgeon at the Edinburgh Infirmary. Bell was a very remarkable man in
body and mind. He was thin, wiry, dark, with a high-nosed acute face,
penetrating grey eyes, angular shoulders, and a jerky way of walking.
His voice was high and discordant. He was a very skilful surgeon, but
his strong point was diagnosis, not only of disease, but of occupation
and character. For some reason which I have never understood he
singled me out from the drove of students who frequented his wards and
made me his out-patient clerk, which meant that I had to array his
out-patients, make simple notes of their cases, and then show them in,
one by one, to the large room in which Bell sat in state surrounded
by his dressers and students. Then I had ample chance of studying his
methods and of noticing that he often learned more of the patient by
a few quick glances than I had done by my questions. Occasionally the
results were very dramatic, though there were times when he blundered.
In one of his best cases he said to a civilian patient: “Well, my man,
you’ve served in the army.”

“Aye, sir.”

“Not long discharged?”

“No, sir.”

“A Highland regiment?”

“Aye, sir.”

“A non-com. officer.”

“Aye, sir.”

“Stationed at Barbados?”

“Aye, sir.”

“You see, gentlemen,” he would explain, “the man was a respectful man
but did not remove his hat. They do not in the army, but he would
have learned civilian ways had he been long discharged. He has an
air of authority and he is obviously Scottish. As to Barbados, his
complaint is elephantiasis, which is West Indian and not British.” To
his audience of Watsons it all seemed very miraculous until it was
explained, and then it became simple enough. It is no wonder that after
the study of such a character I used and amplified his methods when in
later life I tried to build up a scientific detective who solved cases
on his own merits and not through the folly of the criminal. Bell took
a keen interest in these detective tales and even made suggestions
which were not, I am bound to say, very practical. I kept in touch with
him for many years and he used to come upon my platform to support me
when I contested Edinburgh in 1901.

When I took over his out-patient work he warned me that a knowledge
of Scottish idioms was necessary and I, with the confidence of youth,
declared that I had got it. The sequel was amusing. On one of the
first days an old man came who, in response to my question, declared
that he had a “bealin’ in his oxter.” This fairly beat me, much to
Bell’s amusement. It seems that the words really mean an abscess in the
arm-pit.

Speaking generally of my University career I may say that though I
took my fences in my stride and balked at none of them, still I won
no distinction in the race. I was always one of the ruck, neither
lingering nor gaining--a 60 per cent man at examinations. There were,
however, some reasons for this which I will now state.

It was clearly very needful that I should help financially as quickly
as possible, even if my help only took the humble form of providing
for my own keep. Therefore I endeavoured almost from the first to
compress the classes for a year into half a year, and so to have some
months in which to earn a little money as a medical assistant, who
would dispense and do odd jobs for a doctor. When I first set forth to
do this my services were so obviously worth nothing that I had to put
that valuation upon them. Even then it might have been a hard bargain
for the doctor, for I might have proved like the youth in “Pickwick”
who had a rooted idea that oxalic acid was Epsom salts. However, I had
horse sense enough to save myself and my employer from any absolute
catastrophe. My first venture, in the early summer of ’78, was with a
Dr. Richardson, running a low-class practice in the poorer quarters of
Sheffield. I did my best, and I dare say he was patient, but at the
end of three weeks we parted by mutual consent. I went on to London,
where I renewed my advertisements in the medical papers, and found a
refuge for some weeks with my Doyle relatives, then living at Clifton
Gardens, Maida Vale. I fear that I was too Bohemian for them and they
too conventional for me. However, they were kind to me, and I roamed
about London for some time with pockets so empty that there was little
chance of idleness breeding its usual mischief. I remember that there
were signs of trouble in the East and that the recruiting sergeants,
who were very busy in Trafalgar Square, took my measure in a moment and
were very insistent that I should take the shilling. There was a time
when I was quite disposed to do so, but my mother’s plans held me back.
I may say that late in the same year I did volunteer as a dresser for
the English ambulances sent to Turkey for the Russian War, and was on
the Red Cross list, but the collapse of the Turks prevented my going
out.

Soon, however, there came an answer to my advertisement: “Third
year’s student, desiring experience rather than remuneration,
offers his services, &c., &c.” It was from a Dr. Elliot living in a
townlet in Shropshire which rejoiced in the extraordinary name of
“Ruyton-of-the-eleven-towns.” It was not big enough to make one town,
far less eleven. There for four months I helped in a country practice.
It was a very quiet existence and I had a good deal of time to myself
under very pleasant circumstances, so that I really trace some little
mental progress to that period, for I read and thought without
interruption. My medical duties were of a routine nature save on a few
occasions. One of them still stands out in my memory, for it was the
first time in my life that I ever had to test my own nerve in a great
sudden emergency. The doctor was out when there came a half-crazed
messenger to say that in some rejoicings at a neighbouring great house
they had exploded an old cannon which had promptly burst and grievously
injured one of the bystanders. No doctor was available, so I was the
last resource. On arriving there I found a man in bed with a lump of
iron sticking out of the side of his head. I tried not to show the
alarm which I felt, and I did the obvious thing by pulling out the
iron. I could see the clean white bone, so I could assure them that the
brain had not been injured. I then pulled the gash together, staunched
the bleeding, and finally bound it up, so that when the doctor did at
last arrive he had little to add. This incident gave me confidence and,
what is more important still, gave others confidence. On the whole I
had a happy time at Ruyton, and have a pleasing memory of Dr. Elliot
and his wife.

After a winter’s work at the University my next assistantship was a
real money-making proposition to the extent of some two pounds a month.
This was with Dr. Hoare, a well-known Birmingham doctor, who had a
five-horse City practice, and every working doctor, before the days of
motors, would realize that this meant going from morning to night. He
earned some three thousand a year, which takes some doing, when it is
collected from 3_s._ 6_d._ visits and 1_s._ 6_d._ bottles of medicine,
among the very poorest classes of Aston. Hoare was a fine fellow,
stout, square, red-faced, bushy-whiskered and dark-eyed. His wife was
also a very kindly and gifted woman, and my position in the house was
soon rather that of a son than of an assistant. The work, however,
was hard and incessant, and the pay very small. I had long lists of
prescriptions to make up every day, for we dispensed our own medicine,
and one hundred bottles of an evening were not unknown. On the whole I
made few mistakes, though I have been known to send out ointment and
pill boxes with elaborate directions on the lid and nothing inside. I
had my own visiting list, also, the poorest or the most convalescent,
and I saw a great deal, for better or worse, of very low life. Twice
I returned to this Birmingham practice and always my relations with
the family became closer. At my second visit my knowledge had greatly
extended and I did midwifery cases, and the more severe cases in
general practice as well as all the dispensing. I had no time to spend
any money and it was as well, for every shilling was needed at home.

It was in this year that I first learned that shillings might be earned
in other ways than by filling phials. Some friend remarked to me that
my letters were very vivid and surely I could write some things to
sell. I may say that the general aspiration towards literature was
tremendously strong upon me, and that my mind was reaching out in
what seemed an aimless way in all sorts of directions. I used to be
allowed twopence for my lunch, that being the price of a mutton pie,
but near the pie shop was a second-hand book shop with a barrel full
of old books and the legend “Your choice for 2_d._” stuck above it.
Ofter the price of my luncheon used to be spent on some sample out of
this barrel, and I have within reach of my arm as I write these lines,
copies of Gordon’s Tacitus, Temple’s works, Pope’s Homer, Addison’s
Spectator and Swift’s works, which all came out of the twopenny box.
Any one observing my actions and tastes would have said that so strong
a spring would certainly overflow, but for my own part I never dreamed
I could myself produce decent prose, and the remark of my friend, who
was by no means given to flattery, took me greatly by surprise. I
sat down, however, and wrote a little adventure story which I called
“The Mystery of the Sassassa Valley.” To my great joy and surprise it
was accepted by “Chambers’ Journal,” and I received three guineas.
It mattered not that other attempts failed. I had done it once and I
cheered myself by the thought that I could do it again. It was years
before I touched “Chambers’” again, but in 1879 I had a story, “The
American’s Tale,” in “London Society,” for which also I got a small
cheque. But the idea of real success was still far from my mind.

During all this time our family affairs had taken no turn for the
better, and had it not been for my excursions and for the work of
my sisters we could hardly have carried on. My father’s health had
utterly broken, he had to retire to that Convalescent Home in which
the last years of his life were spent, and I, aged twenty, found myself
practically the head of a large and struggling family. My father’s life
was full of the tragedy of unfulfilled powers and of undeveloped gifts.
He had his weaknesses, as all of us have ours, but he had also some
very remarkable and outstanding virtues. A tall man, long-bearded, and
elegant, he had a charm of manner and a courtesy of bearing which I
have seldom seen equalled. His wit was quick and playful. He possessed,
also, a remarkable delicacy of mind which would give him moral courage
enough to rise and leave any company which talked in a manner which
was coarse. When he passed away a few years later I am sure that
Charles Doyle had no enemy in the world, and that those who knew him
best sympathized most with the hard fate which had thrown him, a man
of sensitive genius, into an environment which neither his age nor
his nature was fitted to face. He was unworldly and unpractical and
his family suffered for it, but even his faults were in some ways the
result of his developed spirituality. He lived and died a fervent son
of the Roman Catholic faith. My mother, however, who had never been a
very devoted daughter of that great institution, became less so as life
progressed, and finally found her chief consolation in the Anglican
fold.

This brings me to my own spiritual unfolding, if such it may be
called, during those years of constant struggle. I have already in my
account of the Jesuits shown how, even as a boy, all that was sanest
and most generous in my nature rose up against a narrow theology and
an uncharitable outlook upon the other great religions of the world.
In the Catholic Church to doubt anything is to doubt everything, for
since it is a vital axiom that doubt is a mortal sin when once it has,
unbidden and unappeasable, come upon you, everything is loosened and
you look upon the whole wonderful interdependent scheme with other
and more critical eyes. Thus viewed there was much to attract--its
traditions, its unbroken and solemn ritual, the beauty and truth of
many of its observances, its poetical appeal to the emotions, the
sensual charm of music, light and incense, its power as an instrument
of law and order. For the guidance of an unthinking and uneducated
world it could in many ways hardly be surpassed, as has been shown in
Paraguay, and in the former Ireland where, outside agrarian trouble,
crime was hardly known. All this I could clearly see, but if I may
claim any outstanding characteristic in my life, it is that I have
never paltered or compromised with religious matters, that I have
always weighed them very seriously, and that there was something in
me which made it absolutely impossible, even when my most immediate
interests were concerned, to say anything about them save that which
I, in the depth of my being, really believed to be true. Judging it
thus by all the new knowledge which came to me both from my reading
and from my studies, I found that the foundations not only of Roman
Catholicism but of the whole Christian faith, as presented to me in
nineteenth century theology, were so weak that my mind could not build
upon them. It is to be remembered that these were the years when
Huxley, Tyndall, Darwin, Herbert Spencer and John Stuart Mill were our
chief philosophers, and that even the man in the street felt the strong
sweeping current of their thought, while to the young student, eager
and impressionable, it was overwhelming. I know now that their negative
attitude was even more mistaken, and very much more dangerous, than the
positive positions which they attacked with such destructive criticism.
A gap had opened between our fathers and ourselves so suddenly and
completely that when a Gladstone wrote to uphold the Gadarene swine, or
the six days of Creation, the youngest student rightly tittered over
his arguments, and it did not need a Huxley to demolish them. I can
see now very clearly how deplorable it is that manifest absurdities
should be allowed to continue without even a footnote to soften them
in the sacred text, because it has the effect that what is indeed
sacred becomes overlaid, and one can easily be persuaded that what is
false in parts can have no solid binding force. There are no worse
enemies of true religion than those who clamour against all revision
or modification of that strange mass of superbly good and questionable
matter which we lump all together into a single volume as if there were
the same value to all of it. It is not solid gold, but gold in clay,
and if this be understood the earnest seeker will not cast it aside
when he comes upon the clay, but will value the gold the more in that
he has himself separated it.

It was, then, all Christianity, and not Roman Catholicism alone, which
had alienated my mind and driven me to an agnosticism, which never for
an instant degenerated into atheism, for I had a very keen perception
of the wonderful poise of the universe and the tremendous power of
conception and sustenance which it implied. I was reverent in all
my doubts and never ceased to think upon the matter, but the more I
thought the more confirmed became my non-conformity. In a broad sense
I was a Unitarian, save that I regarded the Bible with more criticism
than Unitarians usually show. This negative position was so firm that
it seemed to me to be a terminus; whereas it proved only a junction on
the road of life where I was destined to change from the old well-worn
line on to a new one. Every materialist, as I can now clearly see, is
a case of arrested development. He has cleared his ruins, but has not
begun to build that which would shelter him. As to psychic knowledge, I
knew it only by the account of exposures in the police courts and the
usual wild and malicious statements in the public press. Years were
to pass before I understood that in that direction might be found the
positive proofs which I constantly asserted were the only conditions
upon which I could resume any sort of allegiance to the unseen. I must
have definite demonstration, for if it were to be a matter of faith
then I might as well go back to the faith of my fathers. “Never will
I accept anything which cannot be proved to me. The evils of religion
have all come from accepting things which cannot be proved.” So I said
at the time and I have been true to my resolve.

I would not give the impression that my life was gloomy or morbidly
thoughtful because it chanced that I had some extra cares and some
worrying thoughts. I had an eager nature which missed nothing in the
way of fun which could be gathered, and I had a great capacity for
enjoyment. I read much. I played games all I could. I danced, and I
sampled the drama whenever I had a sixpence to carry me to the gallery.
On one occasion I got into a row which might have been serious. I was
waiting on the gallery steps with a great line of people, the shut
door still facing us. There were half a dozen soldiers in the crowd and
one of these squeezed a girl up against the wall in such a way that she
began to scream. As I was near them I asked the man to be more gentle,
on which he dug his elbow with all his force into my ribs. He turned on
me as he did so, and I hit him with both hands in the face. He bored
into me and pushed me up into the angle of the door, but I had a grip
of him and he could not hit me, though he tried to kick me in cowardly
fashion with his knee. Several of his comrades threatened me, and one
hit me on the head with his cane, cracking my hat. At this moment
luckily the door opened and the rush of the crowd carried the soldiers
on, one sympathetic corporal saying, “Take your breath, sir! Take your
breath!” I threw my man through the open door and came home, for it was
clearly asking for trouble if I remained. It was a good escape from an
awkward business.

And now I come to the first real outstanding adventure in my life,
which is worthy of a fresh chapter and of a more elaborate treatment.




CHAPTER IV

WHALING IN THE ARCTIC OCEAN

 The _Hope_--John Gray--Boxing--The Terrible Mate--Our Criminal--First
 Sight of a Woman--A Hurricane--Dangers of the Fishing--Three Dips
 in the Arctic--The Idlers’ Boat--Whale Taking--Glamour of the
 Arctic--Effect of Voyage.


It was in the _Hope_, under the command of the well-known whaler, John
Gray, that I paid a seven months’ visit to the Arctic Seas in the year
1880. I went in the capacity of surgeon, but as I was only twenty years
of age when I started, and as my knowledge of medicine was that of an
average third year’s student, I have often thought that it was as well
that there was no very serious call upon my services.

It came about in this way. One raw afternoon in Edinburgh, whilst I
was sitting reading hard for one of those examinations which blight
the life of a medical student, there entered to me one Currie, a
fellow-student with whom I had some slight acquaintance. The monstrous
question which he asked drove all thought of my studies out of my head.

“Would you care,” said he, “to start next week for a whaling cruise?
You’ll be surgeon, two pound ten a month and three shillings a ton oil
money.”

“How do you know I’ll get the berth?” was my natural question.

“Because I have it myself. I find at this last moment that I can’t go,
and I want to get a man to take my place.”

“How about an Arctic kit?”

“You can have mine.”

In an instant the thing was settled, and within a few minutes the
current of my life had been deflected into a new channel.

In little more than a week I was in Peterhead, and busily engaged, with
the help of the steward, in packing away my scanty belongings in the
locker beneath my bunk on the good ship _Hope_.

I speedily found that the chief duty of the surgeon was to be the
companion of the captain, who is cut off by the etiquette of the
trade from anything but very brief and technical talks with his other
officers. I should have found it intolerable if the captain had been
a bad fellow, but John Gray of the _Hope_ was a really splendid man,
a grand seaman and a serious-minded Scot, so that he and I formed a
comradeship which was never marred during our long _tête-à-tête_. I
see him now, his ruddy face, his grizzled hair and beard, his very
light blue eyes always looking into far spaces, and his erect muscular
figure. Taciturn, sardonic, stern on occasion, but always a good just
man at bottom.

There was one curious thing about the manning of the _Hope_. The man
who signed on as first mate was a little, decrepit, broken fellow,
absolutely incapable of performing the duties. The cook’s assistant, on
the other hand, was a giant of a man, red-bearded, bronzed, with huge
limbs, and a voice of thunder. But the moment that the ship cleared the
harbour the little, decrepit mate disappeared into the cook’s galley,
and acted as scullery-boy for the voyage, while the mighty scullery-boy
walked aft and became chief mate. The fact was, that the one had the
certificate, but was past sailoring, while the other could neither read
nor write, but was as fine a seaman as ever lived; so, by an agreement
to which everybody concerned was party, they swapped their berths when
they were at sea.

Colin McLean, with his six foot of stature, his erect, stalwart figure,
and his fierce, red beard, pouring out from between the flaps of his
sealing-cap, was an officer by natural selection, which is a higher
title than that of a Board of Trade certificate. His only fault was
that he was a very hot-blooded man, and that a little would excite him
to a frenzy. I have a vivid recollection of an evening which I spent in
dragging him off the steward, who had imprudently made some criticism
upon his way of attacking a whale which had escaped. Both men had had
some rum, which had made the one argumentative and the other violent,
and as we were all three seated in a space of about seven by four, it
took some hard work to prevent bloodshed. Every now and then, just as
I thought all danger was past, the steward would begin again with his
fatuous, “No offence, Colin, but all I says is that if you had been a
bit quicker on the fush----” I don’t know how often this sentence was
begun, but never once was it ended; for at the word “fush” Colin always
seized him by the throat, and I Colin round the waist, and we struggled
until we were all panting and exhausted. Then when the steward had
recovered a little breath he would start that miserable sentence once
more, and the “fush” would be the signal for another encounter. I
really believe that if I had not been there the mate would have hurt
him, for he was quite the angriest man that I have ever seen.

There were fifty men upon our whaler, of whom half were Scotchmen
and half Shetlanders, whom we picked up at Lerwick as we passed. The
Shetlanders were the steadier and more tractable, quiet, decent, and
soft-spoken; while the Scotch seamen were more likely to give trouble,
but also more virile and of stronger character. The officers and
harpooners were all Scotch, but as ordinary seamen, and especially as
boatmen, the Shetlanders were as good as could be wished.

There was only one man on board who belonged neither to Scotland
nor to Shetland, and he was the mystery of the ship. He was a tall,
swarthy, dark-eyed man, with blue-black hair and beard, singularly
handsome features, and a curious, reckless sling of his shoulders when
he walked. It was rumoured that he came from the south of England, and
that he had fled thence to avoid the law. He made friends with no one,
and spoke very seldom, but he was one of the smartest seamen in the
ship. I could believe from his appearance that his temper was Satanic,
and that the crime for which he was hiding may have been a bloody one.
Only once he gave us a glimpse of his hidden fires. The cook--a very
burly, powerful man--the little mate was only assistant--had a private
store of rum, and treated himself so liberally to it that for three
successive days the dinner of the crew was ruined. On the third day
our silent outlaw approached the cook with a brass saucepan in his
hand. He said nothing, but he struck the man such a frightful blow that
his head flew through the bottom and the sides of the pan were left
dangling round his neck. The half-drunken, half-stunned cook talked of
fighting, but he was soon made to feel that the sympathy of the ship
was against him, so he reeled back, grumbling, to his duties while the
avenger relapsed into his usual moody indifference. We heard no further
complaints of the cooking.

I have spoken of the steward, and as I look back at that long voyage,
during which for seven months we never set foot on land, the kindly
open face of Jack Lamb comes back to me. He had a beautiful and
sympathetic tenor voice, and many an hour have I listened to it with
its accompaniment of rattling plates and jingling knives, as he cleaned
up the dishes in his pantry. He had a great memory for pathetic and
sentimental songs, and it is only when you have not seen a woman’s
face for six months that you realize what sentiment means. When Jack
trilled out “Her bright smile haunts me still,” or “Wait for me at
Heaven’s Gate, sweet Belle Mahone,” he filled us all with a vague sweet
discontent which comes back to me now as I think of it. To appreciate
a woman one has to be out of sight of one for six months. I can well
remember that as we rounded the north of Scotland on our return we
dipped our flag to the lighthouse, being only some hundreds of yards
from the shore. A figure emerged to answer our salute, and the excited
whisper ran through the ship, “It’s a wumman!” The captain was on the
bridge with his telescope. I had the binoculars in the bows. Every one
was staring. She was well over fifty, short skirts and sea boots--but
she was a “wumman.” “Anything in a mutch!” the sailors used to say, and
I was of the same way of thinking.

However, all this has come before its time. It was, I find by my log,
on February 28 at 2 p.m. that we sailed from Peterhead, amid a great
crowd and uproar. The decks were as clean as a yacht, and it was very
unlike my idea of a whaler. We ran straight into bad weather and the
glass went down at one time to 28.375, which is the lowest reading
I can remember in all my ocean wanderings. We just got into Lerwick
Harbour before the full force of the hurricane broke, which was so
great that lying at anchor with bare poles and partly screened we were
blown over to an acute angle. If it had taken us a few hours earlier
we should certainly have lost our boats--and the boats are the life of
a whaler. It was March 11 before the weather moderated enough to let
us get on, and by that time there were twenty whalers in the bay, so
that our setting forth was quite an occasion. That night and for a day
longer the _Hope_ had to take refuge in the lee of one of the outlying
islands. I got ashore and wandered among peat bogs, meeting strange,
barbarous, kindly people who knew nothing of the world. I was led back
to the ship by a wild, long-haired girl holding a torch, for the peat
holes make it dangerous at night--I can see her now, her tangled black
hair, her bare legs, madder-stained petticoat, and wild features under
the glare of the torch. I spoke to one old man there who asked me the
news. I said, “The Tay bridge is down,” which was then a fairly stale
item. He said, “Eh, have they built a brig over the Tay?” After that I
felt inclined to tell him about the Indian Mutiny.

What surprised me most in the Arctic regions was the rapidity with
which you reach them. I had never realized that they lie at our very
doors. I think that we were only four days out from Shetland when we
were among the drift ice. I awoke one morning to hear the bump, bump of
the floating pieces against the side of the ship, and I went on deck
to see the whole sea covered with them to the horizon. They were none
of them large, but they lay so thick that a man might travel far by
springing from one to the other. Their dazzling whiteness made the sea
seem bluer by contrast, and with a blue sky above, and that glorious
Arctic air in one’s nostrils, it was a morning to remember. Once on one
of the swaying, rocking pieces we saw a huge seal, sleek, sleepy, and
imperturbable, looking up with the utmost assurance at the ship, as if
it knew that the close time had still three weeks to run. Further on we
saw on the ice the long human-like prints of a bear. All this with the
snowdrops of Scotland still fresh in our glasses in the cabin.

I have spoken about the close time, and I may explain that, by an
agreement between the Norwegian and British Governments, the subjects
of both nations are forbidden to kill a seal before April 3. The reason
for this is that the breeding season is in March, and if the mothers
should be killed before the young are able to take care of themselves,
the race would soon become extinct. For breeding purposes the seals
all come together at a variable spot, which is evidently pre-arranged
among them, and as this place can be anywhere within many hundreds of
square miles of floating ice, it is no easy matter for the fisher to
find it. The means by which he sets about it are simple but ingenious.
As the ship makes its way through the loose ice-streams, a school
of seals is observed travelling through the water. Their direction
is carefully taken by compass and marked upon the chart. An hour
afterwards perhaps another school is seen. This is also marked. When
these bearings have been taken several times, the various lines upon
the chart are prolonged until they intersect. At this point, or near
it, it is likely that the main pack of the seals will be found.

When you do come upon it, it is a wonderful sight. I suppose it is the
largest assembly of creatures upon the face of the world--and this
upon the open icefields hundreds of miles from the Greenland coast.
Somewhere between 71 deg. and 75 deg. is the rendezvous, and the
longitude is even vaguer; but the seals have no difficulty in finding
the address. From the crow’s nest at the top of the main-mast, one
can see no end of them. On the furthest visible ice one can still see
that sprinkling of pepper grains. And the young lie everywhere also,
snow-white slugs, with a little black nose and large dark eyes. Their
half-human cries fill the air; and when you are sitting in the cabin of
a ship which is in the heart of the seal-pack, you would think you were
next door to a monstrous nursery.

The _Hope_ was one of the first to find the seal-pack that year, but
before the day came when hunting was allowed, we had a succession of
strong gales, followed by a severe roll, which tilted the floating ice
and launched the young seals prematurely into the water. And so, when
the law at last allowed us to begin work, Nature had left us with very
little work to do. However, at dawn upon the third, the ship’s company
took to the ice, and began to gather in its murderous harvest. It is
brutal work, though not more brutal than that which goes on to supply
every dinner-table in the country. And yet those glaring crimson pools
upon the dazzling white of the icefields, under the peaceful silence
of a blue Arctic sky, did seem a horrible intrusion. But an inexorable
demand creates an inexorable supply, and the seals, by their death,
help to give a living to the long line of seamen, dockers, tanners,
curers, triers, chandlers, leather merchants, and oil-sellers, who
stand between this annual butchery on the one hand, and the exquisite,
with his soft leather boots, or the savant, using a delicate oil for
his philosophical instruments, upon the other.

I have cause to remember that first day of sealing on account of the
adventures which befell me. I have said that a strong swell had arisen,
and as this was dashing the floating ice together the captain thought
it dangerous for an inexperienced man to venture upon it. And so, just
as I was clambering over the bulwarks with the rest, he ordered me
back and told me to remain on board. My remonstrances were useless,
and at last, in the blackest of tempers, I seated myself upon the top
of the bulwarks, with my feet dangling over the outer side, and there
I nursed my wrath, swinging up and down with the roll of the ship.
It chanced, however, that I was really seated upon a thin sheet of
ice which had formed upon the wood, and so when the swell threw her
over to a particularly acute angle, I shot off and vanished into the
sea between two ice-blocks. As I rose, I clawed on to one of these,
and soon scrambled on board again. The accident brought about what I
wished, however, for the captain remarked that as I was bound to fall
into the ocean in any case, I might just as well be on the ice as on
the ship. I justified his original caution by falling in twice again
during the day, and I finished it ignominiously by having to take to
my bed while all my clothes were drying in the engine-room. I was
consoled for my misfortunes by finding that they amused the captain to
such an extent that they drove the ill-success of our sealing out of
his head, and I had to answer to the name of “the great northern diver”
for a long time thereafter. I had a narrow escape once through stepping
backwards over the edge of a piece of floating ice while I was engaged
in skinning a seal. I had wandered away from the others, and no one saw
my misfortune. The face of the ice was so even that I had no purchase
by which to pull myself up, and my body was rapidly becoming numb in
the freezing water. At last, however, I caught hold of the hind flipper
of the dead seal, and there was a kind of nightmare tug-of-war, the
question being whether I should pull the seal off or pull myself on.
At last, however, I got my knee over the edge and rolled on to it. I
remember that my clothes were as hard as a suit of armour by the time I
reached the ship, and that I had to thaw my crackling garments before I
could change them.

This April sealing is directed against the mothers and young. Then, in
May, the sealer goes further north, and about latitude 77 deg. or 78
deg. he comes upon the old male seals, who are by no means such easy
victims. They are wary creatures, and it takes good long-range shooting
to bag them. Then, in June, the sealing is over, and the ship bears
away further north still, until in the 79th or 80th degree she is in
the best Greenland whaling latitudes. There we stayed for three months
or so, with very varying fortunes, for though we pursued many whales,
only four were slain.

There are eight boats on board a whaler, but it is usual to send out
only seven, for it takes six men to man each, so that when seven are
out no one is left on board save the so-called “idlers” who have not
signed to do seaman’s work at all. It happened, however, that aboard
the _Hope_ the idlers were rather a hefty crowd, so we volunteered to
man the odd boat, and we made it, in our own estimation at least, one
of the most efficient, both in sealing and in whaling. The steward, the
second engineer, the donkey-engine man, and I were the oars, with a
red-headed Highlander for harpooner and the handsome outlaw to steer.
Our tally of seals was high, and in whaling we were once the lancing
and once the harpooning boat, so our record was good. So congenial
was the work to me that Captain Gray was good enough to offer to make
me harpooner as well as surgeon, with the double pay, if I would come
with him on a second voyage. It is well that I refused, for the life is
dangerously fascinating.

[Illustration: STEAM-WHALER “HOPE.”]

It is exciting work pulling on to a whale. Your own back is turned to
him, and all you know about him is what you read upon the face of the
boat-steerer. He is staring out over your head, watching the creature
as it swims slowly through the water, raising his hand now and again
as a signal to stop rowing when he sees that the eye is coming round,
and then resuming the stealthy approach when the whale is end on. There
are so many floating pieces of ice, that as long as the oars are quiet
the boat alone will not cause the creature to dive. So you creep slowly
up, and at last you are so near that the boat-steerer knows that you
can get there before the creature has time to dive--for it takes some
little time to get that huge body into motion. You see a sunken gleam
in his eyes, and a flush in his cheeks, and it’s “Give way, boys! Give
way, all! Hard!” Click goes the trigger of the big harpoon gun, and
the foam flies from your oars. Six strokes, perhaps, and then with
a dull greasy squelch the bows run upon something soft, and you and
your oars are sent flying in every direction. But little you care for
that, for as you touched the whale you have heard the crash of the gun,
and know that the harpoon has been fired point-blank into the huge,
lead-coloured curve of its side. The creature sinks like a stone, the
bows of the boat splash down into the water again, but there is the
little red Jack flying from the centre thwart to show that you are
fast, and there is the line whizzing swiftly under the seats and over
the bows between your outstretched feet.

And this is the great element of danger--for it is rarely indeed that
the whale has spirit enough to turn upon its enemies. The line is
very carefully coiled by a special man named the line-coiler, and it
is warranted not to kink. If it should happen to do so, however, and
if the loop catches the limbs of any one of the boat’s crew, that man
goes to his death so rapidly that his comrades hardly know that he has
gone. It is a waste of fish to cut the line, for the victim is already
hundreds of fathoms deep.

“Haud your hand, mon,” cried the harpooner, as a seaman raised his
knife on such an occasion. “The fush will be a fine thing for the
widdey.” It sounds callous, but there was philosophy at the base of it.

This is the harpooning, and that boat has no more to do. But the
lancing, when the weary fish is killed with the cold steel, is a more
exciting because it is a more prolonged experience. You may be for half
an hour so near to the creature that you can lay your hand upon its
slimy side. The whale appears to have but little sensibility to pain,
for it never winces when the long lances are passed through its body.
But its instinct urges it to get its tail to work on the boats, and
yours urges you to keep poling and boat-hooking along its side, so as
to retain your safe position near its shoulder. Even there, however, we
found on one occasion that we were not quite out of danger’s way, for
the creature in its flurry raised its huge-side-flapper and poised it
over the boat. One flap would have sent us to the bottom of the sea,
and I can never forget how, as we pushed our way from under, each of
us held one hand up to stave off that great, threatening fin--as if
any strength of ours could have availed if the whale had meant it to
descend. But it was spent with loss of blood, and instead of coming
down the fin rolled over the other way, and we knew that it was dead.
Who would swap that moment for any other triumph that sport can give?

The peculiar other-world feeling of the Arctic regions--a feeling so
singular that if you have once been there the thought of it haunts
you all your life--is due largely to the perpetual daylight. Night
seems more orange-tinted and subdued than day, but there is no great
difference. Some captains have been known to turn their hours right
round out of caprice, with breakfast at night and supper at ten in
the morning. There are your twenty-four hours, and you may carve them
as you like. After a month or two the eyes grow weary of the eternal
light, and you appreciate what a soothing thing our darkness is. I can
remember as we came abreast of Iceland, on our return, catching our
first glimpse of a star, and being unable to take my eyes from it,
it seemed such a dainty little twinkling thing. Half the beauties of
Nature are lost through over-familiarity.

Your sense of loneliness also heightens the effect of the Arctic
Seas. When we were in whaling latitudes it is probable that, with the
exception of our consort, there was no vessel within 800 miles of
us. For seven long months no letter and no news came to us from the
southern world. We had left in exciting times. The Afghan campaign
had been undertaken, and war seemed imminent with Russia. We returned
opposite the mouth of the Baltic without any means of knowing whether
some cruiser might not treat us as we had treated the whales. When we
met a fishing-boat at the north of Shetland our first inquiry was as
to peace or war. Great events had happened during those seven months:
the defeat of Maiwand and the famous march of Roberts from Cabul to
Candahar. But it was all haze to us; and, to this day, I have never
been able to get that particular bit of military history straightened
out in my own mind.

The perpetual light, the glare of the white ice, the deep blue of the
water, these are the things which one remembers most clearly, and the
dry, crisp, exhilarating air, which makes mere life the keenest of
pleasures. And then there are the innumerable sea-birds, whose call is
for ever ringing in your ears--the gulls, the fulmars, the snow-birds,
the burgomasters, the loons, and the rotjes. These fill the air, and
below, the waters are for ever giving you a peep of some strange new
creature. The commercial whale may not often come your way, but his
less valuable brethren abound on every side. The finner shows his 90
feet of worthless tallow, with the absolute conviction that no whaler
would condescend to lower a boat for him. The mis-shapen hunchback
whale, the ghost-like white whale, the narwhal, with his unicorn horn,
the queer-looking bottle-nose, the huge, sluggish, Greenland shark, and
the terrible killing grampus, the most formidable of all the monsters
of the deep,--these are the creatures who own those unsailed seas. On
the ice are the seals, the saddle-backs, the ground seals and the huge
bladdernoses, 12 feet from nose to tail, with the power of blowing
up a great blood-red football upon their noses when they are angry,
which they usually are. Occasionally one sees a white Arctic fox upon
the ice, and everywhere are the bears. The floes in the neighbourhood
of the sealing-ground are all criss-crossed with their tracks--poor
harmless creatures, with the lurch and roll of a deep-sea mariner. It
is for the sake of the seals that they come out over those hundreds
of miles of ice; and they have a very ingenious method of catching
them, for they will choose a big icefield with just one blow-hole for
seals in the middle of it. Here the bear will squat, with its powerful
forearms crooked round the hole. Then, when the seal’s head pops up,
the great paws snap together, and Bruin has got his luncheon. We used
occasionally to burn some of the cook’s refuse in the engine-room
fires, and the smell would, in a few hours, bring up every bear for
many miles to leeward of us.

Though twenty or thirty whales have been taken in a single year in
the Greenland seas, it is probable that the great slaughter of last
century has diminished their number until there are not more than a few
hundreds in existence. I mean, of course, of the right whale, for the
others, as I have said, abound. It is difficult to compute the numbers
of a species which comes and goes over great tracts of water and among
huge icefields, but the fact that the same whale is often pursued by
the same whaler upon successive trips shows how limited their number
must be. There was one, I remember, which was conspicuous through
having a huge wart, the size and shape of a beehive, upon one of the
flukes of its tail. “I’ve been after that fellow three times,” said the
captain, as we dropped our boats. “He got away in ’71. In ’74 we had
him fast, but the harpoon drew. In ’76 a fog saved him. It’s odds that
we have him now!” I fancied that the betting lay rather the other way
myself, and so it proved, for that warty tail is still thrashing the
Arctic seas for all that I know to the contrary.

I shall never forget my own first sight of a right whale. It had
been seen by the look-out on the other side of a small icefield, but
had sunk as we all rushed on deck. For ten minutes we awaited its
reappearance, and I had taken my eyes from the place, when a general
gasp of astonishment made me glance up, and there was the whale _in
the air_. Its tail was curved just as a trout’s is in jumping, and
every bit of its glistening lead-coloured body was clear of the water.
It was little wonder that I should be astonished, for the captain,
after thirty voyages, had never seen such a sight. On catching it we
discovered that it was very thickly covered with a red, crab-like
parasite, about the size of a shilling, and we conjectured that it was
the irritation of these creatures which had driven it wild. If a man
had short, nailless flippers, and a prosperous family of fleas upon his
back, he would appreciate the situation.

Apart from sport, there is a glamour about those circumpolar regions
which must affect everyone who has penetrated to them. My heart goes
out to that old, grey-headed whaling captain who, having been left
for an instant when at death’s door, staggered off in his night gear,
and was found by nurses far from his house and still, as he mumbled,
“pushing to the norrard.” So an Arctic fox, which a friend of mine
endeavoured to tame, escaped, and was caught many months afterwards
in a gamekeeper’s trap in Caithness. It was also pushing norrard,
though who can say by what strange compass it took its bearings? It
is a region of purity, of white ice and of blue water, with no human
dwelling within a thousand miles to sully the freshness of the breeze
which blows across the icefields. And then it is a region of romance
also. You stand on the very brink of the unknown, and every duck that
you shoot bears pebbles in its gizzard which come from a land which the
maps know not. It was a strange and fascinating chapter of my life.

I went on board the whaler a big, straggling youth, I came off it a
powerful, well-grown man. I have no doubt that my physical health
during my whole life has been affected by that splendid air, and
that the inexhaustible store of energy which I have enjoyed is to
some extent drawn from the same source. It was mental and spiritual
stagnation, or even worse, for there is a coarsening effect in so
circumscribed a life with comrades who were fine, brave fellows, but
naturally rough and wild. However I had my health to show for it, and
also more money than I had ever possessed before. I was still boyish in
many ways, and I remember that I concealed gold pieces in every pocket
of every garment, that my mother might have the excitement of hunting
for them. It added some fifty pounds to her small exchequer.

Now I had a straight run in to my final examination, which I passed
with fair but not notable distinction at the end of the winter session
of 1881. I was now a Bachelor of Medicine and a Master of Surgery,
fairly launched upon my professional career.




CHAPTER V

THE VOYAGE TO WEST AFRICA

 The _Mayumba_--Fearful Weather--An Escape--Hanno’s Voyage--
 Atlantis--A Land of Death--Blackwater Fever--Missionaries--Strange
 Fish--Danger of Luxury--A Foolish Swim--The Ship on Fire--England once
 more.


It had always been my intention to take a voyage as ship’s surgeon
when I had taken my degree, as I could in this way see something of
the world, and at the same time earn a little of the money which I so
badly needed if I were ever to start in practice for myself. When a
man is in the very early twenties he will not be taken seriously as a
practitioner, and though I looked old for my age, it was clear that I
had to fill in my time in some other way. My plans were all exceedingly
fluid, and I was ready to join the Army, Navy, Indian Service or
anything which offered an opening. I had no reason to think that I
would find a billet upon a passenger ship and had nearly forgotten that
I had my name down, when I suddenly received a telegram telling me
to come to Liverpool and to take medical charge of the African Steam
Navigation Company’s _Mayumba_, bound for the West Coast. In a week I
was there, and on October 22, 1881, we started on our voyage.

The _Mayumba_ was a trim little steamer of about 4,000 tons--a giant
after my experience in the 200-ton whaler. She was built for commerce,
carrying mixed cargoes to the coast and coming back with palm oil in
puncheons, palm nuts in bulk, ivory and other tropical products. What
with whale oil and palm oil there certainly seemed to be something
greasy about my horoscope. There was room for twenty or thirty
passengers, and it was for their behoof that I was paid some £12 a
month.

It was well that we were seaworthy, for we put out in a violent gale,
which became so bad as we emerged from the Mersey that we were forced
into Holyhead for the night. Next day, in vile and thick weather,
with a strong sea running, we made our way down the Irish Sea. I shall
always believe that I may have saved the ship from disaster, for as I
was standing near the officer of the watch I suddenly caught sight of a
lighthouse standing out in a rift in the fog. It was on the port side
and I could not imagine how any lighthouse could be on the port side
of a ship which was, as I knew, well down on the Irish coast. I hate
to be an alarmist, so I simply touched the mate’s sleeve, pointed to
the dim outline of the lighthouse, and said: “Is that all right?” He
fairly jumped as his eye lit upon it and he gave a yell to the men at
the wheel and rang a violent signal to the engine-room. The lighthouse,
if I remember right, was the Tuskar, and we were heading right into a
rocky promontory which was concealed by the rain and fog.

I have been lucky in my captains, for Captain Gordon Wallace was one
of the best, and we have kept in touch during the later years. Our
passengers were mostly for Madeira, but there were some pleasant
ladies bound for the Coast, and some unpleasant negro traders whose
manners and bearing were objectionable, but who were patrons of the
line and must, therefore, be tolerated. Some of these palm oil chiefs
and traders have incomes of many thousands a year, but as they have no
cultivated tastes they can only spend their money on drink, debauchery
and senseless extravagance. One of them, I remember, had a choice
selection of the demi-monde of Liverpool to see him off.

The storms followed us all the way down the Channel and across the
Bay, which is normal, I suppose, at such a time of year. Everyone
was seasick, so as doctor I had some work to do. However, before we
reached Madeira we ran into fine weather and all our troubles were soon
forgotten. One never realizes the comfort of a dry deck until one has
been ankle-deep for a week. I missed the sea-boots and rough-and-ready
dress of the whaler, for when one is in blue serge and gilt buttons one
does not care to take a ducking. Just as we thought, however, that we
were all right a worse gale than ever broke over us, the wind luckily
being behind us, so that it helped us on our way. With jib, trysail
and main staysail, which was as much as we could stand, we lurched
and staggered, swept every now and then by the big Atlantic combers,
which were phosphorescent at night, so that flames of liquid fire came
coursing down the decks. Very glad we were when after a week of storm
we saw the rugged peaks of Porto Sancto, an outlier of Madeira, and
finally came to anchor in Funchal Bay. It was dark when we reached our
moorings and it was good to see the lights of the town, and the great
dark loom of the hills behind it. A lunar rainbow spanned the whole
scene, a rare phenomenon which I have never seen before or since.

Teneriffe was our next stopping-place, Santa Cruz being the port of
call. In those days it did a great trade in cochineal, which was
derived from an insect cultivated on the cacti. When dried they
furnished the dye, and a packet of the creatures averaged £350 at
that time, but now I suppose that the German aniline dyes have killed
the trade as completely as whaling has been killed by the mineral.
A day later we were at Las Palmas, capital of Grand Canary, whence,
looking back, we had a fine view of the famous Teneriffe Peak some 60
miles away. Leaving Las Palmas we were in the delightful region of the
northeast trade-winds, the most glorious part of the ocean, seldom
rough, yet always lively, with foam-capped seas and a clear sky. Day by
day it grew hotter, however, and when we lost the Trades, and sighted
the Isle de Los off the Sierra Leone coast, I began to realize what the
Tropics meant. When you feel your napkin at meals to be an intolerable
thing, and when you find that it leaves a wet weal across your white
duck trousers, then you know that you really have arrived.

On November 9 we reached Freetown, the capital of Sierra Leone, our
first port of call upon the African Main--a lovely spot but a place of
death. Here our ladies left us, and indeed it was sad to see them go,
for female lives are even shorter than male upon the coast. I speak of
the days of malaria and blackwater fever, before Ronald Ross and others
had done their great work of healing and prevention. It was a truly
dreadful place in the early eighties, and the despair which reigned in
the hearts of the white people made them take liberties with alcohol
which they would not have dared to take in a healthier place. A year’s
residence seemed to be about the limit of human endurance. I remember
meeting one healthy-looking resident who told me that he had been there
three years. When I congratulated him he shook his head. “I am a doomed
man. I have advanced Bright’s disease,” said he. One wondered whether
the colonies were really worth the price we had to pay.

From Sierra Leone we steamed to Monrovia, which is the capital of the
negro republic of Liberia, which, as the name implies, was founded
mainly by escaped slaves. So far as I could see it was orderly enough,
though all small communities which take themselves seriously have a
comic aspect. Thus at the time of the Franco-German War, Liberia is
said to have sent out its single Customs boat, which represented its
official Navy, and stopped the British mail-ship in order to send word
to Europe that it did not intend to interfere in the matter.

It is a very monotonous view, for whether it is the Ivory Coast or
the Gold Coast, or the Liberian shore, it always presents the same
features--burning sunshine, a long swell breaking into a white line
of surf, a margin of golden sand, and then the low green bush, with
an occasional palm tree rising above it. If you have seen a mile, you
have seen a thousand. As I write now, these ports at which we stopped,
Grand Bassam, Cape Palmas, Accra, Cape Coast Castle, all form the
same picture in my mind. One incident only I can remember. At some
small village, the name of which I have forgotten, there came off a
tall young Welshman in a state of furious excitement; his niggers had
mutinied and he was in fear of his life. “There they are waiting for
me!” he cried, and pointed to a dusky group upon the distant beach. We
offered to take him on, but he could not leave his property, so all we
could do was to promise to send a gunboat up from Cape Coast Castle.
I have often wondered how such people got on after the German menace
compelled us to draw in all our outlying fleets.

This coast is dotted at night with native fires, some of them of great
extent, arising no doubt from their habit of burning the grass. It is
interesting that in Hanno’s account of his journey down the coast--the
only piece of Carthaginian literature which has reached us--he talks
also of the fires which he saw at night. As he speaks of gorillas it is
probable that he got as far as the Gaboon, or south of the Line. He
saw great volcanic activity, and the remains of it is still visible at
Fernando Po, which is almost all volcanic. In Hanno’s time, however,
the hills were actually spouting fire and the country was a sea of
flame, so that he dare not set foot on shore. I have wondered sometimes
whether the last cataclysm at Atlantis may not have been much later
than we think. The account of Plato puts it at about 9000 B.C., but it
may well have been a gradual thing and the last spasm have been that
of which Hanno saw the traces. All this activity which he described is
exactly opposite the spot where the old continent was supposed to have
been.

Our ships have rough-and-ready ways as they jog down the coast. Once we
moved on while a hundred native visitors were still on board. It was
funny to see them dive off and make for their canoes. One of them had a
tall hat, an umbrella, and a large coloured picture of the Saviour--all
of which he had bought at the trading booths which the men rig up in
the forecastle. These impedimenta did not prevent him from swimming
to his boat. At another minor port, since we were pressed for time,
we simply threw our consignment of barrel staves overboard, knowing
that soon or late they would wash up on the beach, though how the real
owner could make good his claim to them I do not know. Occasionally the
native scores in this game. Some years ago, before Dahomey was annexed
by the French, the captain took the oil casks on board at Whydah by
means of a long rope and a donkey engine, an ingenious way of avoiding
the surf, which came to a sudden stop when a company of the famous
Amazons appeared and threatened to fire upon the ship if they did not
pay their dues to the surf boats in the ordinary fashion.

I had myself to pay my dues to the climate, for on November 18 I find
an eloquent gap in my diary. We had reached Lagos, and there, rolling
in a greasy swell off that huge lagoon, the germ or the mosquito or
whatever it was reached me and I was down with a very sharp fever. I
remember staggering to my bunk and then all was blotted out. As I was
myself doctor there was no one to look after me and I lay for several
days fighting it out with Death in a very small ring and without a
second. It speaks well for my constitution that I came out a victor.
I remember no psychic experience, no vision, no fears, nothing save a
nightmare fog from which I emerged as weak as a child. It must have
been a close call, and I had scarcely sat up before I heard that
another victim who got it at the same time was dead.

A week later found me, convalescent and full of energy once more, up
the Bonny River, which certainly never got its name from the Scotch
adjective, for it is in all ways hateful with its brown smelling stream
and its mango swamps. The natives were all absolute savages, offering
up human sacrifices to sharks and crocodiles. The captain had heard the
screams of the victims and seen them dragged down to the water’s edge,
while on another occasion he had seen the protruding skull of a man who
had been buried in an ant-heap. It is all very well to make game of the
missionaries, but how could such people ever be improved if it were not
for the labours of devoted men?

We called at Fernando Po, and later at Victoria, a lovely little
settlement upon the Main, with the huge peak of the Cameroons rising
behind it. A dear homely Scotch lassie was playing the part of
missionary there, and if she did not evangelize she at least civilized,
which is more important. It lies in a beautiful bay studded with
islands and well wooded all round. For some reason the whole style of
the scenery changes completely here, and it is the more welcome after
the thousand miles of monotony to the north. All this land went, for
some reason, to Germany later, and has now reverted to the French,
who are not, as a rule, good Colonial neighbours. I went ashore at
Victoria, and I cannot forget my thrill when what I thought was a
good-sized blue bird passed me and I found that it was a butterfly.

To reach Old Calabar we had to steam for 60 miles up the Old Calabar
River, the channel lying so near the shore that we brushed the trees
on one side. I lay in wait with my rifle, but though I saw the swirl
of several alligators none emerged. Old Calabar seemed the largest
and most prosperous place we had visited, but here also the hand of
death was over all, and it was “eat, drink, and be merry” for the old
and unsatisfactory reason. Here again we met one of these young lady
pioneers of civilization. Civilization is the better, but it is a stern
and dreadful call which summons a woman to such a work.

Getting a canoe, I ascended the river for several miles to a place
called Creektown. Dark and terrible mangrove swamps lay on either side
with gloomy shades where nothing that is not horrible could exist.
It is indeed a foul place. Once in an isolated tree, standing in a
flood, I saw an evil-looking snake, worm-coloured and about 3 feet
long. I shot him and saw him drift down stream. I learned later in life
to give up killing animals, but I confess that I have no particular
compunctions about that one. Creektown is in native territory, and the
King sent down a peremptory order that we should report ourselves to
him, but as it sounded ominous and might mean a long delay we got our
paddles out and were soon back in British waters.

I had a curious experience one morning. A large ribbon-shaped fish,
about 3 or 4 feet long, came up and swam upon the surface near the
ship. Having my gun handy, I shot it. I don’t think five seconds could
have elapsed before another larger and thicker fish--a big catfish, I
should say--darted up from the depths, seized the wounded fish by the
middle, and dragged it down. So murderous is the food-search, and so
keen the watch in Nature! I saw something similar in the mixed tank of
an aquarium once, where a fish stunned himself by swimming against the
glass front, and was instantly seized and devoured by his neighbour. A
strange fish to which I was introduced at Calabar was the electrical
torpedo fish. It is handed to you in an earthenware saucer--a quiet
little drab creature about 5 inches long--and you are asked to tickle
its back. Then you learn exactly how high you can jump.

The death-like impression of Africa grew upon me. One felt that the
white man with his present diet and habits was an intruder who was
never meant to be there, and that the great sullen brown continent
killed him as one crushes nits. I find in my diary:

    “Oh Africa, where are the charms
      That sages have seen in thy face?
    Better dwell in Old England on alms
      Than be rich in that terrible place.”

The life aboard ship, however, was an easy and, in some ways, a
luxurious one--too luxurious for a young man who had his way to make
in the world. Premature comfort is a deadly enervating thing. I
remember considering my own future--I stood upon the poop with a raging
thunderstorm around me--and seeing very clearly that one or two more
such voyages would sap my simple habits and make me unfit for the hard
struggle which any sort of success would need. The idea of success in
literature had never crossed my mind. It was still of medicine only
that I thought, but I knew by my Birmingham experience how long and
rough a path it was for those who had no influence and could not afford
to buy. Then and there I vowed that I would wander no more, and that
was surely one of the turning-points of my life. A “Wander-Jahr” is
good, but two “Wander-Jahre” may mean damnation--and it is hard to
stop. I find that on the same day of fruitful meditation I swore off
alcohol for the rest of the voyage. I drank quite freely at this period
of my life, having a head and a constitution which made me fairly
immune, but my reason told me that the unbounded cocktails of West
Africa were a danger, and with an effort I cut them out. There is a
certain subtle pleasure in abstinence, and it is only socially that it
is difficult. If we were all abstainers as a matter of course, like the
real Mahomedans, none of us would ever miss it.

I did a mad thing at Cape Coast Castle, for, in a spirit either of
bravado or pure folly, I swam round the ship--or at least for some
length along her and back again. I suppose it was the consideration
that black folk go freely into the water which induced me to do it. For
some reason white folk do not share the same immunity. As I was drying
myself on deck I saw the triangular back fin of a shark rise to the
surface. Several times in my life I have done utterly reckless things
with so little motive that I have found it difficult to explain them to
myself afterwards. This was one of them.

The most intelligent and well-read man whom I met on the Coast was
a negro, the American Consul at Monrovia. He came on with us as a
passenger. My starved literary side was eager for good talk, and it
was wonderful to sit on deck discussing Bancroft and Motley, and then
suddenly realize that you were talking to one who had possibly been a
slave himself, and was certainly the son of slaves. He had thought a
good deal about African travel. “The only way to explore Africa is to
go without arms and with few servants. You would not like it in England
if a body of men came armed to the teeth and marched through your land.
The Africans are quite as sensitive.” It was the method of Livingstone
as against the method of Stanley. The former takes the braver and
better man.

This negro gentleman did me good, for a man’s brain is an organ for
the formation of his own thoughts and also for the digestion of other
people’s, and it needs fresh fodder. We had, of course, books aboard
the ship, but neither many nor good. I cannot trace that I made any
mental or spiritual advancement during the voyage, but I added one more
experience to my chaplet, and I suppose it all goes to some ultimate
result in character or personality. I was a strong full-blooded young
man, full of the joy of life, with nothing of what Oliver Wendell
Holmes calls “pathological piety and tuberculous virtues.” I was a man
among men. I walked ever among pitfalls and I thank all ministering
angels that I came through, while I have a softened heart for those who
did not.

Our voyage home--oil-gathering from port to port on the same but
reversed route--was uneventful until the very last stride, when just as
we were past Madeira the ship took fire. Whether it was the combustion
of coal dust has never been determined, but certainly the fire broke
out in the bunkers, and as there was only a wooden partition between
these bunkers and a cargo of oil, we were in deadly danger. For the
first day we took it lightly, as a mere smoulder, and for a second and
third day we were content to seal the gratings as far as possible, to
play down on it with the hose, and to shift the coal away from the
oil. On the fourth morning, however, things took a sudden turn for the
worse. I copy from my log book:

“January 9. I was awakened early in the morning by the purser, Tom
King, poking his head in at my door and informing me that the ship was
in a blaze, and that all hands had been called and were working down
below. I got my clothes on, but when I came on deck nothing was to be
seen of it save thick volumes of smoke from the bunker ventilators,
and a lurid glow down below. I offered to go down, but there seemed
to be as many working as could be fitted in. I was then asked to call
the passengers. I waked each in turn, and they all faced the situation
very bravely and coolly. One, a Swiss, sat up in his bunk, rubbed his
eyes, and in answer to my remark: ‘The ship is on fire!’ said: ‘I have
often been on ships that were on fire.’ ‘Splendide mendax’--but a good
spirit! All day we fought the flames, and the iron side of the ship
was red-hot at one point. Boats were prepared and provisioned and no
doubt at the worst we could row or sail them to Lisbon, where my dear
sisters would be considerably surprised if their big brother walked in.
However, we are getting the better of it, and by evening those ominous
pillars of smoke were down to mere wisps. So ends an ugly business!”

On January 14 we were in Liverpool once more, and West Africa was but
one more of the cinema reels of memory. It is, I am told, very much
improved now in all things. My old friend and cricket companion, Sir
Fred. Guggisberg, is Governor at Accra and has asked me to see the old
ground under very different auspices. I wish I could, but the sands
still run and there is much to be done.




CHAPTER VI

MY FIRST EXPERIENCES IN PRACTICE

 A Strange Character--His Honeymoon--His Bristol Practice--Telegram
 from Plymouth--Six Amusing Weeks--A Deep Plot--My Southsea
 Venture--Furnishing on the Cheap--The Plot Explodes.


I have now come to the temporary end of my voyages, which were to be
renewed in years to come, and I have reached the time when, under very
curious circumstances, I endeavoured to establish myself in medical
practice. In a book written some years afterwards called “The Stark
Munro Letters,” I drew in very close detail the events of the next
few years, and there the curious reader will find them more clearly
and fully set out than would be to scale in these pages. I would only
remark, should any reader reconstruct me or my career from that book,
that there are some few incidents there which are imaginary, and that,
especially, the whole incident of the case of a lunatic and of Lord
Saltire in Chapter IV occurred to a friend and not to myself. Otherwise
the whole history of my association with the man whom I called
Cullingworth, his extraordinary character, our parting and the way in
which I was left to what seemed certain ruin, were all as depicted.
I will here simply give the essentials of the story, and retain the
fictitious name.

In my last year of study at Edinburgh I formed a friendship with this
remarkable student. He came of a famous medical family, his father
having been a great authority upon zymotic disease. He came also of a
famous athletic stock, and was a great Rugby forward himself, though
rather handicapped by the Berserk fury with which he would play. He
was up to international form, and his younger brother was reckoned
by good judges to be about the best forward who ever donned the
rose-embroidered jersey of England.

Cullingworth was as strong mentally as physically. In person he was
about 5 ft. 9 in. in height, perfectly built, with a bulldog jaw,
bloodshot deep-set eyes, overhanging brows, and yellowish hair as
stiff as wire, which spurted up above his brows. He was a man born for
trouble and adventure, unconventional in his designs and formidable in
his powers of execution--a man of action with a big but incalculable
brain guiding the action. He died in early middle age, and I understand
that an autopsy revealed some cerebral abnormality, so that there was
no doubt a pathological element in his strange explosive character.
For some reason he took a fancy to me, and appeared to attach an undue
importance to my advice.

When I met him first he had just indulged in one of his wild escapades,
which ended usually in a fight or in a transitory appearance in a
police court, but on this occasion was more serious and permanent.
He had run off with a charming young lady and married her, she being
a ward in Chancery and under age. However, the deed was done and
all the lawyers in the world could not undo it, though they might
punish the culprit. He told me how he and the lady had gone over a
Bradshaw with the intention that when they came on a station of which
neither of them had ever heard, they would make for that place and
spend their honeymoon there. They came therefore upon some awful
name, Clodpole-in-the-Marsh or something of the kind, and there
they sojourned in the village inn. Cullingworth stained his yellow
hair black, but the stain took in some places and not in others,
so that he looked as if he had escaped from Barnum’s show. What
Clodpole-in-the-Marsh could have thought of such an extraordinary
couple I cannot imagine, and it is probably the one occasion on which
it ever buzzed. I cannot think of any surer way of getting publicity
than that which Cullingworth took to avoid detection. In London they
would have been perfectly unobserved. I remember that for years
Cullingworth’s hair presented curious iridescent tints which were the
remains of his disguise.

He brought his bride safely to Edinburgh, where they hired a flat and
lived in it without furnishing it save for the absolutely needful.
I have dined with them there on an apple dumpling, seated on a pile
of thick volumes as there was no chair. We introduced them to a few
friends, did what we could for the lonely lady, and finally they
drifted off, and for a time we heard no more.

Just before I started for Africa I got a long telegram from
Cullingworth imploring me to go to Bristol as he needed my advice.
I was in Birmingham and I set forth at once. When I reached Bristol
he conducted me to a fine mansion, and there poured out his tale of
woe. He had started in great style, hoping to rally the remains of
his father’s patients, but his money had run out, he was dunned by
his tradespeople, there were no patients, and what was he to do? We
had a joyous riotous time for two days, for there was an exuberant
atmosphere about the man which rose above all trouble. The only advice
I could give was that he should make a composition with his creditors.
I heard afterwards that he assembled them, addressed them in a long and
emotional speech, reduced them almost to tears with his picture of the
struggles of a deserving young man, and finally got a unanimous vote of
confidence from them with full consent that he should pay at his own
leisure. It was the sort of thing that he would do, and tell the story
afterwards with a bull’s roar of laughter which could be heard down the
street.

When I had been back a couple of months from Africa, I received another
telegram--he always telegraphed and never wrote--which ran in some such
way as this: “Started here last June. Colossal success. Come down by
next train if possible. Plenty of room for you. Splendid opening.” The
telegram was stamped Plymouth. A second even more explosive telegram
upbraided me for delay and guaranteed me £300 the first year. This
looked like business, so off I went.

The events of the next six weeks, in the late spring and early
summer of 1882, were more fitted for some rollicking novel than for
the sober pages of a veracious chronicle. The conditions which I
found at Plymouth were incredible. In a short time this man, half
genius and half quack, had founded a practice worth several thousand
pounds of ready money in the year. “Free consultations but pay for
your medicine,” was his slogan, and as he charged a good price for
the latter it worked out all the same in the end. The mere words
“Free Consultations” attracted crowds. He used drugs in a heroic
and indiscriminate manner which produced dramatic results but at
an unjustifiable risk. I remember one instance where dropsy had
disappeared before a severe dose of croton oil in a way that set all
the gossips talking. People flocked into the town from 20 and 30 miles
round, and not only his waiting rooms, but his stairs and his passages,
were crammed. His behaviour to them was extraordinary. He roared and
shouted, scolded them, joked them, pushed them about, and pursued
them sometimes into the street, or addressed them collectively from
the landing. A morning with him when the practice was in full blast
was as funny as any pantomime and I was exhausted with laughter. He
had a well-worn volume on Medical Jurisprudence which he pretended
was the Bible, and he swore old women on it that they would drink no
more tea. I have no doubt he did a great deal of good, for there was
reason and knowledge behind all that he did, but his manner of doing
it was unorthodox in the extreme. His wife made up the prescriptions
at a pigeon-hole at the end of a passage and received the price which
was marked on the label carried down by the patient. Every evening
Cullingworth walked back to his great residential house upon the Hoe,
bearing his bag of silver, his coat flying, his hat on the back of his
head, and his great fangs grinning up at every doctor whose disgusted
face showed at a window.

Cullingworth had rigged me up a room, furnished with one table and
two chairs, in which I could take surgical or other cases which he
did not care to handle. I fear that my professional manners were very
unexciting after his more flamboyant efforts, which I could not imitate
even if I would. I had, however, a steady dribble of patients, and it
looked as if I might build something up. I went up country once, and
operated upon an old fellow’s nose which had contracted cancer through
his holding the bowl of a short clay pipe immediately beneath it. I
left him with an aristocratic, not to say supercilious organ, which was
the wonder of the village, and might have been the foundation of my
fame.

But there were other influences at work, and the threads of fate were
shooting out at strange unexpected angles. My mother had greatly
resented my association with Cullingworth. Her family pride had been
aroused, and justly as I can now see, though my wanderings had left
me rather too Bohemian and careless upon points of etiquette. But I
liked Cullingworth and even now I can’t help liking him--and I admired
his strong qualities and enjoyed his company and the extraordinary
situations which arose from any association with him. This resistance
upon my part, and my defence of my friend, annoyed my mother the more,
and she wrote me several letters of remonstrance which certainly dealt
rather faithfully with his character as it appeared to her. I was
careless of my papers and these letters were read both by Cullingworth
and his wife. I do them no injustice in saying this, for they finally
admitted it. Apparently he imagined--he was a man of strange suspicions
and secret plottings--that I was a party to such sentiments, whereas
they were actually called forth by my defence of him. His manner
changed, and more than once I caught his fierce grey eyes looking
furtively at me with a strange sullen expression, so much so that I
asked him what was the matter. He was actually scheming my ruin, which
would be nothing financially, since I had nothing to lose, but would be
much both to my mother and me if it touched my honour.

One day he came to me and told me that he thought my presence
complicated his practice and that we had better part. I agreed in all
good humour, assuring him that I had not come to hurt him and that I
was very grateful for what he had done, even if it came to nothing.
He then strongly advised me to go into practice myself. I replied
that I had no capital. He answered that he would see to that, that he
would allow me a pound a week until I got my feet under me, and that
I could repay it at leisure. I thanked him warmly, and after looking
at Tavistock I finally decided that Portsmouth would be a good place,
the only reason being that I knew the conditions at Plymouth, and
Portsmouth seemed analogous. I boarded an Irish steamer, therefore,
and about July of 1882 I started off by sea, with one small trunk
containing all my earthly possessions, to start practice in a town in
which I knew no single soul. My cash balance was under £10, and I knew
not only that I had to meet all present expenses upon this, but that
I had to furnish a house upon it. On the other hand the weekly pound
should easily cover all personal needs, and I had the devil-may-care
optimism of youth as to the future.

When I arrived at Portsmouth I went into lodgings for a week. On the
very first night, with that curious faculty for running into dramatic
situations which has always been with me, I became involved in a street
fight with a rough who was beating (or rather kicking) a woman. It was
a strange start, and after I began my practice one of the first people
to whom I opened my door was this very rascal. I don’t suppose he
recognized me, but I could have sworn to him. I emerged from the fray
without much damage, and was very glad to escape some serious scandal.
It was the second time that I had got knocked about in defence of
beauty in distress.

I spent a week in marking down the unoccupied houses, and finally
settled at £40 a year into Bush Villa, which a kindly landlord has
now called Doyle House. I was terrified lest the agent should ask
for a deposit, but the name of my C.B. uncle as reference turned
the scale in my favour. Having secured the empty house and its key,
I went down to a sale in Portsea and for about £4 secured quite a
lot of second-hand--possibly tenth-hand--furniture. It met my needs
and enabled me to make one room possible for patients with three
chairs, a table and a central patch of carpet. I had a bed of sorts
and a mattress upstairs. I fixed up the plate which I had brought
from Plymouth, bought a red lamp on tick, and fairly settled down
in receipt of custom. When all was done I had a couple of pounds in
hand. Servants, of course, were out of the question, so I polished my
own plate every morning, brushed down my front, and kept the house
reasonably clean. I found that I could live quite easily and well on
less than a shilling a day, so I could hold out for a long period.

I had at this time contributed several stories to “London Society,”
a magazine now defunct, but then flourishing under the editorship of
a Mr. Hogg. In the April, 1882, number I had a story, now happily
forgotten, called “Bones,” while in the preceding Christmas number I
had another, “The Gully of Bluemansdyke,” both of them feeble echoes
of Bret Harte. These, with the stories already mentioned, made up my
whole output at this time. I explained to Mr. Hogg how I was situated,
and wrote for him a new tale for his Christmas number entitled “My
Friend the Murderer.” Hogg behaved very well and sent me £10, which
I laid by for my first quarter’s rent. I was not so pleased with him
when, years later, he claimed the full copyright of all these immature
stories, and published them in a volume with my name attached. Have
a care, young authors, have a care, or your worst enemy will be your
early self!

It was as well that I had that £10, for Cullingworth, having learned
that I was fairly committed, with my lease signed, now hurled his
thunderbolt, which he thought would crush me. It was a curt letter--not
a telegram for a wonder--in which he admitted that my letters had been
read, expressed surprise that such a correspondence should have gone
on while I was under his roof, and declared that he could have nothing
more to do with me. He had, of course, no real grievance, but I am
quite willing to admit that he honestly thought he had. But his method
of revenge was a strange example of the schemings of a morbid mind.

For a moment I was staggered. But my boats were burned and I must go
forward. I sent back a derisive reply to Cullingworth, and put him out
of my head for ever--indeed, I heard of him no more until some five
years later I read the news of his premature death. He was a remarkable
man and narrowly escaped being a great one. I fear that he lived up to
his great income and left his wife but poorly off.




CHAPTER VII

MY START AT SOUTHSEA

 A Strange Life--Arrival of my Brother--I Buy up a Shop--Cheap
 Servants--Queer Patients--Dangers of Medical Practice--Income Tax
 Joke--My Marriage--Tragedy in my House--A New Phase.


What with cleaning up, answering the bell, doing my modest shopping,
which was measured in pennies rather than shillings, and perfecting
my simple household arrangements, the time did not hang heavily upon
my hands. It is a wonderful thing to have a house of your own for the
first time, however humble it may be. I lavished all my care upon
the front room to make it possible for patients. The back room was
furnished with my trunk and a stool. Inside the trunk was my larder,
and the top of it was my dining-room table. There was gas laid on, and
I rigged a projection from the wall by which I could sling a pan over
the gas jet. In this way I cooked bacon with great ease, and became
expert in getting a wonderful lot of slices from a pound. Bread, bacon
and tea, with an occasional saveloy--what could man ask for more? It is
(or was) perfectly easy to live well upon a shilling a day.

I had obtained a fair consignment of drugs on tick from a wholesale
house and these also were ranged round the sides of the back room. From
the very beginning a few stray patients of the poorest class, some of
them desirous of novelty, some disgruntled with their own doctors,
the greater part owing bills and ashamed to face their creditor, came
to consult me and consume a bottle of my medicine. I could pay for
my food by the drugs I sold. It was as well, for I had no other way
of paying for it, and I had sworn not to touch the ten golden pieces
which represented my rent. There have been times when I could not buy a
postage stamp and my letters have had to wait, but the ten golden coins
still remained intact.

It was a busy thoroughfare, with a church on one side of my house and
an hotel on the other. The days passed pleasantly enough, for it was
a lovely warm autumn, and I sat in the window of my consulting-room
screened by the rather dingy curtain which I had put up, and watched
the passing crowd or read my book, for I had spent part of my
scanty funds on making myself a member of a circulating library.
In spite of my sparse food, or more probably on account of it, I
was extraordinarily fit and well, so that at night when all hope of
patients was gone for that day I would lock up my house and walk many
miles to work off my energy. With its imperial associations it is a
glorious place and even now if I had to live in a town outside London
it is surely to Southsea, the residential quarter of Portsmouth, that
I would turn. The history of the past carries on into the history of
to-day, the new torpedo-boat flies past the old _Victory_ with the same
white ensign flying from each, and the old Elizabethan culverins and
sakers can still be seen in the same walk which brings you to the huge
artillery of the forts. There is a great glamour there to any one with
the historic sense--a sense which I drank in with my mother’s milk.

It had never entered my head yet that literature might give me a
career, or anything beyond a little casual pocket money, but already
it was a deciding factor in my life, for I could not have held on, and
must have either starved or given in but for the few pounds which Mr.
Hogg sent me, for they enabled all other smaller sums to be spent in
nourishment. I have wondered sometimes as I look back that I did not
contract scurvy, for most of my food was potted, and I had no means of
cooking vegetables. However, I felt no grievance at the time nor any
particular perception that my mode of life was unusual, nor indeed any
particular anxiety about the future. At that age everything seems an
adventure--and there was always the novel pleasure of the house.

Once I had a moment of weakness during which I answered an
advertisement which asked for a doctor to attend coolies in the tea
gardens of the Terai. I spent a few unsettled days waiting for an
answer, but none came and I settled down once more to my waiting and
hoping. I had one avenue of success open of which I could not avail
myself. My Catholic relatives had sent me introductions to the Bishop
and I was assured that there was no Catholic doctor in the town. My
mind, however, was so perfectly clear and I had so entirely broken away
from the old faith that I could not possibly use it for material ends.
I therefore burned the letter of introduction.

As the weeks passed and I had no one with whom to talk I began to think
wistfully of the home circle at Edinburgh, and to wonder why, with my
eight-roomed house, one or more of them should not come to keep me
company. The girls were already governessing or preparing to do so, but
there was my little brother Innes. It would relieve my mother and yet
help me if he could join me. So it was arranged, and one happy evening
the little knicker-bockered fellow, just ten years old, joined me as
my comrade. No man could have had a merrier and brighter one. In a few
weeks we had settled down to a routine life, I having found a good
day-school for him. The soldiers of Portsmouth were already a great joy
to him, and his future career was marked out by his natural tastes, for
he was a born leader and administrator. Little did I foresee that he
would win distinction in the greatest of all wars, and die in the prime
of his manhood--but not before he knew that complete victory had been
attained. Even then our thoughts were very military, and I remember how
we waited together outside the office of the local paper that we might
learn the result of the bombardment of Alexandria.

Turning over some old papers after these pages were written I came upon
a letter written in straggling schoolboy script by my little brother
to his mother at home which may throw an independent light upon those
curious days. It is dated August 16, 1882. He says:

“The patients are crowding in. We have made three bob this week. We
have vaxenated a baby and got hold of a man with consumtion, and to-day
a gipsy’s cart came up to the door selling baskets and chairs so we
determined not to let the man ring as long as he liked. After he had
rong two or three times Arthur yelled out at the pitch of his voice, Go
a way but the man rang again so I went down to the door and pulled open
the letter box and cried out go a way. The man began to swere at me and
say that he wanted to see Arthur. All this time Arthur thought that the
door was open and was yelling Shut that door. Then I came upstairs and
told Arthur what the man had said so Arthur went down and opened the
door and found out that the gipsy’s child had measles.... After all we
got sixpence out of them and that is all ways something.”

I remember the incident well, and certainly my sudden change of tone
from the indignant householder, who is worried by a tramp, to my best
bedside manner in the hopes of a fee, must have been very amusing. My
recollection is, however, that it was the Gipsy who got sixpence out of
us.

For some time Innes and I lived entirely alone, doing the household
tasks between us, and going long walks in the evening to keep ourselves
fit. Then I had a brain-wave and I put an advertisement in the evening
paper that a groundfloor was to let in exchange for services. I had
numerous applicants in reply, and out of them I chose two elderly women
who claimed to be sisters--a claim which they afterwards failed to
make good. When once they were installed we became quite a civilized
household and things began to look better. There were complex quarrels,
however, and one of the women left. The other soon afterwards followed
suit. As the first woman had seemed to me to be the most efficient, I
followed her up and found that she had started a small shop. Her rent
was weekly, so that was easily settled, but she talked gloomily about
her stock. “I will buy everything in your shop,” I said in a large way.
It cost me exactly seventeen and sixpence, and I was loaded up for many
months with matches, cakes of blacking and other merchandise. From then
onwards our meals were cooked for us, and we became in all ways normal.

Month followed month and I picked up a patient here and a patient there
until the nucleus of a little practice had been formed. Sometimes it
was an accident, sometimes an emergency case, sometimes a newcomer
to the town or one who had quarrelled with his doctor. I mixed with
people so far as I could, for I learned that a brass plate alone will
never attract, and people must see the human being who lies in wait
behind it. Some of my tradespeople gave me their custom in return for
mine, and mine was so small that I was likely to have the best of the
bargain. There was a grocer who developed epileptic fits, which meant
butter and tea to us. Poor fellow, he could never have realized the
mixed feelings with which I received the news of a fresh outbreak.
Then there was a very tall, horse-faced old lady with an extraordinary
dignity of bearing. She would sit framed in the window of her little
house, like the picture of a _grande dame_ of the old régime. But
every now and again she went on a wild burst, in the course of which
she would skim plates out of the window at the passers-by. I was the
only one who had influence over her at such times, for she was a
haughty, autocratic old person. Once she showed an inclination to skim
a plate at me also, but I quelled her by assuming a gloomy dignity as
portentous as her own. She had some art treasures which she heaped upon
me when she was what we will politely call “ill,” but claimed back
again the moment she was well. Once when she had been particularly
troublesome I retained a fine lava jug, in spite of her protests, and I
have got it yet.

It is well that medical practice has its humorous side, for it has much
to depress one. Most men never use their reasoning power at all on the
religious side, but if they did they would find it difficult sometimes
to reconcile the sights which a physician sees with the idea of a
merciful providence. If one loses the explanation that this life is a
spiritual chastening for another, and thinks that death ends all, and
that this is our one experience, then it is impossible to sustain the
goodness or the omnipotence of God. So I felt at the time, and it made
me a Materialist, but now I know well that I was judging a story on the
strength of one chapter.

Let me give an example. I was called in by a poor woman to see her
daughter. As I entered the humble sitting-room there was a small cot
at one side, and by the gesture of the mother I understood that the
sufferer was there. I picked up a candle and walking over I stooped
over the little bed, expecting to see a child. What I really saw was
a pair of brown sullen eyes, full of loathing and pain, which looked
up in resentment to mine. I could not tell how old the creature was.
Long thin limbs were twisted and coiled in the tiny couch. The face was
sane but malignant. “What is it?” I asked in dismay when we were out of
hearing. “It’s a girl,” sobbed the mother. “She’s nineteen. Oh! if God
would only take her!” What a life for both! And how hard to face such
facts and accept any of the commonplace explanations of existence!

Medical life is full of dangers and pitfalls, and luck must always play
its part in a man’s career. Many a good man has been ruined by pure
bad luck. On one occasion I was called in to a lady who was suffering
from what appeared to be dyspepsia of a rather severe type. There was
absolutely nothing to indicate anything more serious. I therefore
reassured the family, spoke lightly of the illness, and walked home to
make up a bismuth mixture for her, calling on one or two other cases on
the way. When I got home I found a messenger waiting to say that the
lady was dead. This is the sort of thing which may happen to any man
at any time. It did not hurt me, for I was too lowly to be hurt. You
can’t ruin a practice when there is no practice. The woman really had a
gastric ulcer, for which there is no diagnosis; it was eating its way
into the lining of her stomach, it pierced an artery after I saw her,
and she bled to death. Nothing could have saved her, and I think her
relatives came to understand this.

I made £154 the first year, and £250 the second, rising slowly to £300,
which in eight years I never passed, so far as the medical practice
went. In the first year the Income Tax paper arrived and I filled it
up to show that I was not liable. They returned the paper with “Most
unsatisfactory” scrawled across it. I wrote “I entirely agree” under
the words, and returned it once more. For this little bit of cheek I
was had up before the assessors, and duly appeared with my ledger under
my arm. They could make nothing, however, out of me or my ledger, and
we parted with mutual laughter and compliments.

In the year 1885 my brother left me to go to a public school in
Yorkshire. Shortly afterwards I was married. A lady named Mrs. Hawkins,
a widow of a Gloucestershire family, had come to Southsea with her son
and daughter, the latter a very gentle and amiable girl. I was brought
into contact with them through the illness of the son, which was of
a sudden and violent nature, arising from cerebral meningitis. As
the mother was very awkwardly situated in lodgings, I volunteered to
furnish an extra bedroom in my house and give the poor lad, who was
in the utmost danger, my personal attention. His case was a mortal
one, and in spite of all I could do he passed away a few days later.
Such a death under my own roof naturally involved me in a good deal
of anxiety and trouble--indeed, if I had not had the foresight to ask
a medical friend to see him with me on the day before he passed away,
I should have been in a difficult position. The funeral was from my
house. The family were naturally grieved at the worry to which they
had quite innocently exposed me, and so our relations became intimate
and sympathetic, which ended in the daughter consenting to share my
fortunes. We were married on August 6, 1885, and no man could have had
a more gentle and amiable life’s companion. Our union was marred by
the sad ailment which came after a very few years to cast its shadow
over our lives, but it comforts me to think that during the time when
we were together there was no single occasion when our affection was
disturbed by any serious breach or division, the credit of which lies
entirely with her own quiet philosophy, which enabled her to bear with
smiling patience not only her own sad illness, which lasted so long,
but all those other vicissitudes which life brings with it. I rejoice
to think that though she married a penniless doctor, she was spared
long enough to fully appreciate the pleasure and the material comforts
which worldly success was able to bring us. She had some small income
of her own which enabled me to expand my simple housekeeping in a way
which gave her from the first the decencies, if not the luxuries, of
life.

In many ways my marriage marked a turning-point in my life. A bachelor,
especially one who had been a wanderer like myself, drifts easily into
Bohemian habits, and I was no exception. I cannot look back upon those
years with any spiritual satisfaction, for I was still in the valley of
darkness. I had ceased to butt my head incessantly against what seemed
to be an impenetrable wall, and I had resigned myself to ignorance
upon that which is the most momentous question in life--for a voyage
is bleak indeed if one has no conception to what port one is bound. I
had laid aside the old charts as useless, and had quite despaired of
ever finding a new one which would enable me to steer an intelligible
course, save towards that mist which was all that my pilots, Huxley,
Mill, Spencer and others, could see ahead of us. My mental attitude is
correctly portrayed in “The Stark Munro Letters.” A dim light of dawn
was to come to me soon in an uncertain fitful way which was destined in
time to spread and grow brighter.

Up to now the main interest of my life lay in my medical career. But
with the more regular life and the greater sense of responsibility,
coupled with the natural development of brainpower, the literary
side of me began slowly to spread until it was destined to push the
other entirely aside. Thus a new phase had begun, part medical, part
literary, and part philosophical, which I shall deal with in another
chapter.




CHAPTER VIII

MY FIRST LITERARY SUCCESS

 New Outlook--James Payn--Genesis of Holmes--“A Study in
 Scarlet”--“Micah Clarke”--Disappointments--Andrew Lang--Cornhill
 Dinner--Oscar Wilde--His Criticism of Himself--“The White Company.”


During the years before my marriage I had from time to time written
short stories which were good enough to be marketable at very small
prices--£4 on an average--but not good enough to reproduce. They are
scattered about amid the pages of “London Society,” “All the Year
Round,” “Temple Bar,” “The Boy’s Own Paper,” and other journals. There
let them lie. They served their purpose in relieving me a little of
that financial burden which always pressed upon me. I can hardly have
earned more than £10 or £15 a year from this source, so that the idea
of making a living by it never occurred to me. But though I was not
putting out I was taking in. I still have note-books full of all sorts
of knowledge which I acquired during that time. It is a great mistake
to start putting out cargo when you have hardly stowed any on board. My
own slow methods and natural limitations made me escape this danger.

After my marriage, however, my brain seems to have quickened and both
my imagination and my range of expression were greatly improved. Most
of the short stories which appeared eventually in my “Captain of the
Polestar” were written in those years from 1885 to 1890. Some of them
are perhaps as good honest work as any that I have done. What gave
me great pleasure and for the first time made me realize that I was
ceasing to be a hack writer and was getting into good company was
when James Payn accepted my short story “Habakuk Jephson’s Statement”
for “Cornhill.” I had a reverence for this splendid magazine with its
traditions from Thackeray to Stevenson and the thought that I had won
my way into it pleased me even more than the cheque for £30, which
came duly to hand. It was, of course, anonymous,--such was the law of
the magazine--which protects the author from abuse as well as prevents
his winning fame. One paper began its review by the phrase “‘Cornhill’
opens its new number with a story which would have made Thackeray turn
in his grave.” A dear old gentleman who knew me hurried across the road
to show me the paper with these cheering words. Another, more gracious,
said “‘Cornhill’ begins the New Year with an exceedingly powerful story
in which we seem to trace the hand of the author of ‘The New Arabian
Nights’.” It was great praise, but something less warm, which came
straight to my own address, would have pleased me better.

I soon had two other stories in the “Cornhill”--“John Huxford’s Hiatus”
and “The Ring of Thoth.” I also penetrated the stout Scottish barrier
of “Blackwood” with a story, “The Physiologist’s Wife,” which was
written when I was under the influence of Henry James. But I was still
in the days of very small things--so small that when a paper sent me
a woodcut and offered me four guineas if I would write a story to
correspond I was not too proud to accept. It was a very bad woodcut and
I think that the story corresponded all right. I remember writing a New
Zealand story, though why I should have written about a place of which
I knew nothing I cannot imagine. Some New Zealand critic pointed out
that I had given the exact bearings of the farm mentioned as 90 miles
to the east or west of the town of Nelson, and that in that case it was
situated 20 miles out on the floor of the Pacific Ocean. These little
things will happen. There are times when accuracy is necessary and
others where the idea is everything and the place quite immaterial.

It was about a year after my marriage that I realized that I could
go on doing short stories for ever and never make headway. What is
necessary is that your name should be on the back of a volume. Only so
do you assert your individuality, and get the full credit or discredit
of your achievement. I had for some time from 1884 onwards been engaged
upon a sensational book of adventure which I had called “The Firm
of Girdlestone,” which represented my first attempt at a connected
narrative. Save for occasional patches it is a worthless book, and,
like the first book of everyone else, unless he is a great original
genius, it was too reminiscent of the work of others. I could see it
then, and could see it even more clearly later. When I sent it to
publishers and they scorned it I quite acquiesced in their decision
and finally let it settle, after its periodical flights to town, a
dishevelled mass of manuscript at the back of a drawer.

I felt now that I was capable of something fresher and crisper and more
workmanlike. Gaboriau had rather attracted me by the neat dovetailing
of his plots, and Poe’s masterful detective, M. Dupin, had from boyhood
been one of my heroes. But could I bring an addition of my own? I
thought of my old teacher Joe Bell, of his eagle face, of his curious
ways, of his eerie trick of spotting details. If he were a detective
he would surely reduce this fascinating but unorganized business to
something nearer to an exact science. I would try if I could get this
effect. It was surely possible in real life, so why should I not make
it plausible in fiction? It is all very well to say that a man is
clever, but the reader wants to see examples of it--such examples as
Bell gave us every day in the wards. The idea amused me. What should I
call the fellow? I still possess the leaf of a notebook with various
alternative names. One rebelled against the elementary art which gives
some inkling of character in the name, and creates Mr. Sharps or Mr.
Ferrets. First it was Sherringford Holmes; then it was Sherlock Holmes.
He could not tell his own exploits, so he must have a commonplace
comrade as a foil--an educated man of action who could both join in the
exploits and narrate them. A drab, quiet name for this unostentatious
man. Watson would do. And so I had my puppets and wrote my “Study in
Scarlet.”

I knew that the book was as good as I could make it, and I had high
hopes. When “Girdlestone” used to come circling back with the precision
of a homing pigeon, I was grieved but not surprised, for I acquiesced
in the decision. But when my little Holmes book began also to do the
circular tour I was hurt, for I knew that it deserved a better fate.
James Payn applauded but found it both too short and too long, which
was true enough. Arrowsmith received it in May, 1886, and returned it
unread in July. Two or three others sniffed and turned away. Finally,
as Ward, Lock & Co. made a specialty of cheap and often sensational
literature, I sent it to them.

 “Dear Sir,” they said,--“We have read your story and are pleased with
 it. We could not publish it this year as the market is flooded at
 present with cheap fiction, but if you do not object to its being held
 over till next year, we will give you £25 for the copyright.

  “Yours faithfully
  “WARD, LOCK & CO.”

  “_Oct. 30, 1886._”


It was not a very tempting offer, and even I, poor as I was, hesitated
to accept it. It was not merely the small sum offered, but it was the
long delay, for this book might open a road for me. I was heart-sick,
however, at repeated disappointments, and I felt that perhaps it was
true wisdom to make sure of publicity, however late. Therefore I
accepted, and the book became “Beeton’s Xmas Annual” of 1887. Ward Lock
made a wonderful bargain, for they not only had their Christmas number
but they brought out numerous editions of the book, and finally they
even had the valuable cinema rights for this paltry payment. I never at
any time received another penny for it from this firm, so I do not feel
that I need be grateful even if it so chanced that they cleared my path
in life.

Having a long wait in front of me before this book could appear,
and feeling large thoughts rise within me, I now determined to test
my powers to the full, and I chose a historical novel for this end,
because it seemed to me the one way of combining a certain amount of
literary dignity with those scenes of action and adventure which were
natural to my young and ardent mind. I had always felt great sympathy
for the Puritans, who, after all, whatever their little peculiarities,
did represent political liberty and earnestness in religion. They
had usually been caricatured in fiction and art. Even Scott had not
drawn them as they were. Macaulay, who was always one of my chief
inspirations, had alone made them comprehensible--the sombre fighters,
with their Bibles and their broadswords. There is a great passage
of his--I cannot quote it verbally--in which he says that after
the Restoration if ever you saw a carter more intelligent than his
fellows, or a peasant who tilled his land better, you would be likely
to find that it was an old pikeman of Cromwell’s. This, then, was my
inspiration in “Micah Clarke,” where I fairly let myself go upon the
broad highway of adventure. I was well up in history, but I spent some
months over details and then wrote the book very rapidly. There are
bits of it, the picture of the Puritan household, and the sketch of
Judge Jeffreys, which I have never bettered. When it was finished early
in 1888 my hopes ran high and out it went on its travels.

But, alas! although my Holmes booklet was out, and had attracted
some little favourable comment, the door still seemed to be barred.
James Payn had first peep, and he began his letter of rejection with
the sentence “How can you, can you, waste your time and your wits
writing historical novels!” This was depressing after a year of work.
Then came Bentley’s verdict: “It lacks in our opinion the one great
necessary point for fiction, i.e. interest; and this being the case
we do not think it could ever become popular with libraries and the
general public.” Then Blackwood had its say: “There are imperfections
which would militate against success. The chances of the book proving
a popular success do not seem to be strong enough to warrant us in
publishing it.” There were others even more depressing. I was on the
point of putting the worn manuscript into hospital with its mangled
brother “Girdlestone” when as a last resource, I sent it to Longmans,
whose reader, Andrew Lang, liked it and advised its acceptance. It was
to “Andrew of the brindled hair,” as Stevenson called him, that I owe
my first real opening, and I have never forgotten it. The book duly
appeared in February, 1889, and though it was not a boom book it had
extraordinarily good reviews, including one special one all to itself
by Mr. Prothero in the “Nineteenth Century,” and it has sold without
intermission from that day to this. It was the first solid corner-stone
laid for some sort of literary reputation.

British literature had a considerable vogue in the United States
at this time for the simple reason that there was no copyright and
they had not to pay for it. It was hard on British authors, but far
harder on American ones, since they were exposed to this devastating
competition. Like all national sins it brought its own punishment not
only to American authors, who were guiltless, but to the publishers
themselves, for what belongs to everyone belongs practically to no one,
and they could not bring out a decent edition without being at once
undersold. I have seen some of my early American editions which might
have been printed on the paper that shopmen use for parcels. One good
result, however, from my point of view was that a British author, if he
had anything in him, soon won recognition in America, and afterwards,
when the Copyright Act was passed, he had his audience all ready for
him. My Holmes book had met with some American success and presently
I learned that an agent of Lippincott’s was in London and that he
wished to see me, to arrange for a book. Needless to say that I gave my
patients a rest for a day and eagerly kept the appointment.

Once only before had I touched the edge of literary society. That
was when “Cornhill” was turned into a fully illustrated journal, an
experiment which failed for it was quickly abandoned. The change was
celebrated by a dinner at the Ship, at Greenwich, to which I was
invited on the strength of my short contributions. All the authors
and artists were there, and I remember the reverence with which I
approached James Payn, who was to me the warden of the sacred gate. I
was among the first arrivals, and was greeted by Mr. Smith, the head
of the firm, who introduced me to Payn. I loved much of his work and
waited in awe for the first weighty remark which should fall from his
lips. It was that there was a crack in the window and he wondered
how the devil it had got there. Let me add, however, that my future
experience was to show that there was no wittier or more delightful
companion in the world. I sat next to Anstey that night, who had just
made a most deserved hit with his “Vice Versa,” and I was introduced to
other celebrities, so that I came back walking on air.

Now for the second time I was in London on literary business.
Stoddart, the American, proved to be an excellent fellow, and had two
others to dinner. They were Gill, a very entertaining Irish M.P., and
Oscar Wilde, who was already famous as the champion of æstheticism.
It was indeed a golden evening for me. Wilde to my surprise had read
“Micah Clarke” and was enthusiastic about it, so that I did not feel a
complete outsider. His conversation left an indelible impression upon
my mind. He towered above us all, and yet had the art of seeming to be
interested in all that we could say. He had delicacy of feeling and
tact, for the monologue man, however clever, can never be a gentleman
at heart. He took as well as gave, but what he gave was unique. He
had a curious precision of statement, a delicate flavour of humour,
and a trick of small gestures to illustrate his meaning, which were
peculiar to himself. The effect cannot be reproduced, but I remember
how in discussing the wars of the future he said: “A chemist on each
side will approach the frontier with a bottle”--his upraised hand and
precise face conjuring up a vivid and grotesque picture. His anecdotes,
too, were happy and curious. We were discussing the cynical maxim that
the good fortune of our friends made us discontented. “The devil,”
said Wilde, “was once crossing the Libyan Desert, and he came upon a
spot where a number of small fiends were tormenting a holy hermit. The
sainted man easily shook off their evil suggestions. The devil watched
their failure and then he stepped forward to give them a lesson. ‘What
you do is too crude,’ said he. ‘Permit me for one moment.’ With that he
whispered to the holy man, ‘Your brother has just been made Bishop of
Alexandria.’ A scowl of malignant jealousy at once clouded the serene
face of the hermit. ‘That,’ said the devil to his imps, ‘is the sort of
thing which I should recommend.’”

The result of the evening was that both Wilde and I promised to write
books for “Lippincott’s Magazine”--Wilde’s contribution was “The
Picture of Dorian Grey,” a book which is surely upon a high moral
plane, while I wrote “The Sign of Four,” in which Holmes made his
second appearance. I should add that never in Wilde’s conversation did
I observe one trace of coarseness of thought, nor could one at that
time associate him with such an idea. Only once again did I see him,
many years afterwards, and then he gave me the impression of being
mad. He asked me, I remember, if I had seen some play of his which
was running. I answered that I had not. He said: “Ah, you must go. It
is wonderful. It is genius!” All this with the gravest face. Nothing
could have been more different from his early gentlemanly instincts. I
thought at the time, and still think, that the monstrous development
which ruined him was pathological, and that a hospital rather than a
police court was the place for its consideration.

When his little book came out I wrote to say what I thought of it. His
letter is worth reproducing, as showing the true Wilde. I omit the
early part in which he comments on my own work in too generous terms.

“Between me and life there is a mist of words always. I throw
probability out of the window for the sake of a phrase, and the chance
of an epigram makes me desert truth. Still I do aim at making a work
of art, and I am really delighted that you think my treatment subtle
and artistically good. The newspapers seem to me to be written by the
prurient for the Philistine. I cannot understand how they can treat
‘Dorian Grey’ as immoral. My difficulty was to keep the inherent moral
subordinate to the artistic and dramatic effect, and it still seems to
me that the moral is too obvious.”

Encouraged by the kind reception which “Micah Clarke” had received from
the critics, I now determined upon an even bolder and more ambitious
flight. It seemed to me that the days of Edward III constituted the
greatest epoch in English History--an epoch when both the French and
the Scottish Kings were prisoners in London. This result had been
brought about mainly by the powers of a body of men who were renowned
through Europe but who had never been drawn in British literature, for
though Scott treated in his inimitable way the English archer, it was
as an outlaw rather than as a soldier that he drew him. I had some
views of my own, too, about the Middle Ages which I was anxious to
set forth. I was familiar with Froissart and Chaucer and I was aware
that the famous knights of old were by no means the athletic heroes
of Scott, but were often of a very different type. Hence came my two
books “The White Company,” written in 1889, and “Sir Nigel,” written
fourteen years later. Of the two I consider the latter the better book,
but I have no hesitation in saying that the two of them taken together
did thoroughly achieve my purpose, that they made an accurate picture
of that great age, and that as a single piece of work they form the
most complete, satisfying and ambitious thing that I have ever done.
All things find their level, but I believe that if I had never touched
Holmes, who has tended to obscure my higher work, my position in
literature would at the present moment be a more commanding one. The
work needed much research and I have still got my notebooks full of
all sorts of lore. I cultivate a simple style and avoid long words so
far as possible, and it may be that this surface of ease has sometimes
caused the reader to underrate the amount of real research which lies
in all my historical novels. It is not a matter which troubles me,
however, for I have always felt that justice is done in the end, and
that the real merit of any work is never permanently lost.

I remember that as I wrote the last words of “The White Company” I
felt a wave of exultation and with a cry of “That’s done it!” I hurled
my inky pen across the room, where it left a black smudge upon the
duck’s-egg wall-paper. I knew in my heart that the book would live
and that it would illuminate our national traditions. Now that it has
passed through fifty editions I suppose I may say with all modesty that
my forecast has proved to be correct. This was the last book which I
wrote in my days of doctoring at Southsea, and marks an epoch in my
life, so I can now hark back to some other phases of my last years at
Bush Villa before I broke away into a new existence. I will only add
that “The White Company” was accepted by “Cornhill,” in spite of James
Payn’s opinion of historical novels, and that I fulfilled another
ambition by having a serial in that famous magazine.

A new phase of medical experience came to me about this time, for
I suddenly found myself a unit in the British Army. The operations
in the East had drained the Medical Service, and it had therefore
been determined that local civilian doctors should be enrolled for
temporary duty of some hours a day. The terms were a guinea a day,
and a number of us were tempted to volunteer where there were only
a few vacancies. When I was called before the Board of Selection a
savage-looking old army doctor who presided barked out, “And you,
sir--what are you prepared to do?” To which I answered, “Anything.” It
seems that the others had all been making bargains and reservations, so
my wholehearted reply won the job.

It brought me into closer contact with the savage-looking medico, who
proved to be Sir Anthony Home, V.C.--an honour which he had won in the
Indian Mutiny. He was in supreme charge, and as he was as fierce in
speech and in act as in appearance, everyone was terrified of him. On
one occasion I had told the orderly to draw a man’s tooth, knowing that
he was a very much more skilful dentist than I. I was on my way home
when I was overtaken by an excited soldier who told me that Sergeant
Jones was being court-martialled and would certainly lose his stripes
because he had done a minor operation. I hurried back and on entering
the room found Sir Anthony glaring at the unhappy man, while several
other orderlies stood round awaiting their own turn. Sir Anthony’s
glare was transferred to me when I said that whatever the Sergeant
had done was by my express order. He grunted, banged the book he was
holding, and broke up the meeting. He seemed a most disagreeable old
man, and yet when I was married shortly afterwards he sent me a most
charming message wishing me good fortune. Up to then I had never had
anything from him save a scowl from his thick eyebrows, so I was
most agreeably surprised. Soon afterwards the pressure ceased and we
civilians were all dismissed.




CHAPTER IX

PULLING UP THE ANCHOR

 Psychic Studies--Experiments in Telepathy--My First Séances--A Curious
 Test--General Drayson--Opinion on Theosophy--A. P. Sinnett--W.
 T. Stead--Journey to Berlin--Koch’s Treatment--Brutality of
 Bergmann--Malcolm Morris--Literary Society--Political Work--Arthur
 Balfour--Our Departure.


It was in these years after my marriage and before leaving Southsea
that I planted the first seeds of those psychic studies which were
destined to revolutionize my views and to absorb finally all the
energies of my life. I had at that time the usual contempt which the
young educated man feels towards the whole subject which has been
covered by the clumsy name of Spiritualism. I had read of mediums
being convicted of fraud, I had heard of phenomena which were opposed
to every known scientific law, and I had deplored the simplicity and
credulity which could deceive good, earnest people into believing
that such bogus happenings were signs of intelligence outside our own
existence. Educated as I had been during my most plastic years in the
school of medical materialism, and soaked in the negative views of all
my great teachers, I had no room in my brain for theories which cut
right across every fixed conclusion that I had formed. I was wrong
and my great teachers were wrong, but still I hold that they wrought
well and that their Victorian agnosticism was in the interests of the
human race, for it shook the old iron-clad unreasoning Evangelical
position which was so universal before their days. For all rebuilding
a site must be cleared. There were two separate Victorian movements
towards change, the one an attempt to improve the old building and make
it good enough to carry on--as shown in the Oxford and High Church
development, the other a knocking down of ruins which could only end
in some fresh erection springing up. As I have shown my own position
was that of a respectful materialist who entirely admitted a great
central intelligent cause, without being able to distinguish what that
cause was, or why it should work in so mysterious and terrible a way in
bringing its designs to fulfilment.

From my point of view the mind (and so far as I could see the
soul, which was the total effect of all the hereditary or personal
functionings of the mind) was an emanation from the brain and entirely
physical in its nature. I saw, as a medical man, how a spicule of bone
or a tumour pressing on the brain would cause what seemed an alteration
in the soul. I saw also how drugs or alcohol would turn on fleeting
phases of virtue or vice. The physical argument seemed an overpowering
one. It had never struck me that the current of events might really
flow in the opposite direction, and that the higher faculties could
only manifest themselves imperfectly through an imperfect instrument.
The broken fiddle is silent and yet the musician is the same as ever.

The first thing which steadied me and made me reconsider my position
was the question of telepathy, which was already being discussed by
William Barrett and others, even before the appearance of Myers’
monumental work on “Human Personality”--the first book which devoted
to these psychic subjects the deep study and sustained brain power
which they demand. It may, in my opinion, take a permanent place in
human literature like the “Novum Organum” or “The Descent of Man” or
any other great root-book which has marked a date in human thought.
Having read some of the evidence I began to experiment in thought
transference, and I found a fellow-researcher in Mr. Ball, a well-known
architect in the town. Again and again, sitting behind him, I have
drawn diagrams, and he in turn has made approximately the same figure.
I showed beyond any doubt whatever that I could convey my thought
without words.

But if I could verify such conclusions up to six feet I could not
well doubt them when they gave me the evidence that the same results
could be obtained at a distance. With an appropriate subject, and some
undefined sympathy between the two individuals, it was independent of
space. So the evidence seemed to show. I had always sworn by science
and by the need of fearless following wherever truth might lie. It
was clear now that my position had been too rigid. I had compared the
thought-excretion of the brain to the bile-excretion of the liver.
Clearly this was untenable. If thought could go a thousand miles and
produce a perceptible effect then it differed entirely not only in
degree but in kind from any purely physical material. That seemed
certain, and it must involve some modification of my old views.

About this time (1886) the family of a General whom I attended
professionally became interested in table turning and asked me to come
and check their results. They sat round a dining-room table which
after a time, their hands being upon it, began to sway and finally got
sufficient motion to tap with one leg. They then asked questions and
received answers, more or less wise and more or less to the point. They
were got by the tedious process of reciting the alphabet and writing
down the letter which the tap indicated. It seemed to me that we were
collectively pushing the table, and that our wills were concerned in
bringing down the leg at the right moment. I was interested but very
sceptical. Some of these messages were not vague platitudes but were
definite and from dead friends of the family, which naturally impressed
them greatly, though it had not the same effect upon me, since I did
not know them. I have the old records before me as I write. “Don’t tell
the girls when you see them, but they will talk about me. Kiss my baby
for me. I watch her always. Francie.” This was the style of message,
mixed up with a good many platitudes. We held twenty or more of such
meetings, but I never received anything evidential to my own address,
and I was very critical as to the whole proceedings.

None the less there was a problem to be solved and I went on with
its solution, reading the pros and the cons, and asking advice from
those who had experience, especially from General Drayson, a very
distinguished thinker and a pioneer of psychic knowledge, who lived
at that time at Southsea. I had known Drayson first as an astronomer,
for he had worked out a revolutionary idea by which there is a fatal
mistake in our present idea as to the circle which is described in
the heavens by the prolonged axis of the earth. It is really a wider
circle round a different centre, and this correction enables us to
explain several things now inexplicable, and to make astronomy a more
exact science, with certain very important reactions upon geology and
the recurrent glacial epochs, the exact date of which could be fixed.
His views impressed me much at the time, and several books upholding
them have appeared since his death, notably “Draysoniana” by Admiral
de Horsey. If he makes good, as I think he will, Drayson will make a
great permanent name. His opinion therefore was not negligible upon any
subject, and when he told me his views and experiences on Spiritualism
I could not fail to be impressed, though my own philosophy was far too
solid to be easily destroyed. I was too poor to employ professional
mediums, and to work on such subjects without a medium is as if one
worked at astronomy without a telescope. Once only an old man with some
reputed psychic power came for a small fee and gave us a demonstration.
He went into a loud-breathing trance to the alarm of his audience, and
then gave each of us a test. Mine was certainly a very remarkable one,
for it was “Do not read Leigh Hunt’s book.” I was hesitating at the
time whether I should read his “Comic Dramatists of the Restoration”
or not, for on the one hand it is literature and on the other the
treatment repelled me. This then was a very final and excellent test
so far as telepathy went, but I would not fully grant that it was
more. I was so impressed, however, that I wrote an account of it to
“Light,” the psychic weekly paper, and so in the year 1887 I actually
put myself on public record as a student of these matters. That was
thirty-seven years ago, as I write, so I am a very senior student now.
From that time onwards I read and thought a great deal, though it was
not until the later phase of my life that I realized whither all this
was tending. This question I will treat in a final section by itself,
so that those to whom it is of less interest can avoid it.

I was deeply interested and attracted for a year or two by Theosophy,
because while Spiritualism seemed at that time to be chaos so far
as philosophy went, Theosophy presented a very well thought-out and
reasonable scheme, parts of which, notably reincarnation and Karma,
seemed to offer an explanation for some of the anomalies of life.
I read Sinnett’s “Occult World” and afterwards with even greater
admiration I read his fine exposition of Theosophy in “Esoteric
Buddhism,” a most notable book. I also met him, for he was an old
friend of General Drayson’s, and I was impressed by his conversation.
Shortly afterwards, however, there appeared Dr. Hodgson’s report
upon his investigation into Madame Blavatsky’s proceedings at Adyar,
which shook my confidence very much. It is true that Mrs. Besant has
since then published a powerful defence which tends to show that
Hodgson may have been deceived, but the subsequent book “A Priestess
of Isis” which contains many of her own letters leaves an unpleasant
impression, and Sinnett’s posthumous work seems to show that he also
had lost confidence. On the other hand Colonel Olcott shows that the
woman undoubtedly had real psychic powers, whatever their source. As
to Spiritualism it seems to have only interested her in its lower
phenomenal aspect. Her books show extraordinary erudition and capacity
for hard work, even if they represent the transfer of other people’s
conclusions, as they frequently do. It would be unjust, however,
to condemn the old wisdom simply because it was introduced by this
extraordinary and volcanic person. We have also had in our branch of
the occult many dishonest mediums, but we have hastened to unveil them
where we could do so, and Theosophy will be in a stronger position when
it shakes off Madame Blavatsky altogether. In any case it could never
have met my needs for I ask for severe proof, and if I have to go back
to unquestioning faith I should find myself in the fold from which I
wandered.

My life had been a pleasant one with my steadily-increasing literary
success, my practice, which was enough to keep me pleasantly occupied,
and my sport, which I treat in a later chapter. Suddenly, however,
there came a development which shook me out of my rut, and caused an
absolute change in my life and plans. One daughter, Mary, had been born
to us, our household was a happy one, and as I have never had personal
ambitions, since the simple things of life have always been the most
pleasant to me, it is possible that I should have remained in Southsea
permanently but for this new episode in my life. It arose when in 1890
Koch announced that he had discovered a sure cure for consumption and
that he would demonstrate it upon a certain date in Berlin.

A great urge came upon me suddenly that I should go to Berlin and
see him do so. I could give no clear reason for this but it was an
irresistible impulse and I at once determined to go. Had I been a
well-known doctor or a specialist in consumption it would have been
more intelligible, but I had, as a matter of fact, no great interest
in the more recent developments of my own profession, and a very
strong belief that much of the so-called progress was illusory.
However, at a few hours’ notice I packed up a bag and started off
alone upon this curious adventure. I had had an interchange of letters
with Mr. W. T. Stead over some matter and I called upon him at the
“Review of Reviews” office as I passed through London to ask him if
he could give me an introduction to Koch or to Dr. Bergmann, who was
to give the demonstration. Mr. Stead was very amiable to this big
unknown provincial doctor, and he gave me a letter for the British
Ambassador--Sir Edward Malet, if I remember right--and for Mr. Lowe,
“The Times” correspondent. He also asked me to do a character sketch
of Koch for him, adding that he would have Count Mattei as a feature
of his magazine this month and Koch the next. I said, “Then you will
have the greatest man of science and the greatest quack in Europe
following each other.” Stead glared at me angrily, for it seems that
the Mattei treatment with its blue electricity and the rest of it was
at that moment his particular fad. However, we parted amiably and all
through his life we kept in distant touch, though we came into sharp
collision at the time of the Boer war. He was a brave and honest man,
and if he was impulsive at times it was only the sudden outflame of
that fire which made him the great force for good that he was. In
psychic knowledge he was a generation before his time, though his mode
of expressing it may sometimes have been injudicious.

I went on to Berlin that night and found myself in the Continental
express with a very handsome and courteous London physician bound upon
the same errand as myself. We passed most of the night talking and I
learned that his name was Malcolm Morris and that he also had been
a provincial doctor, but that he had come to London and had made a
considerable hit as a skin specialist in Harley Street. It was the
beginning of a friendship which endured.

Having arrived at Berlin the great thing was to be present at
Bergmann’s demonstration, which was to be next day at twelve. I went
to our Ambassador, was kept long waiting, had a chilly reception and
was dismissed without help or consolation. Then I tried “The Times”
correspondent, but he could not help me either. He and his amiable wife
showed me every courtesy and invited me to dinner that night. Tickets
were simply not to be had and neither money nor interest could procure
them. I conceived the wild idea of getting one from Koch himself and
made my way to his house. While there I had the curious experience of
seeing his mail arrive--a large sack full of letters, which was emptied
out on the floor of the hall, and exhibited every sort of stamp in
Europe. It was a sign of all the sad broken lives and wearied hearts
which were turning in hope to Berlin. Koch remained a veiled prophet,
however, and would see neither me nor any one else. I was fairly at my
wit’s ends and could not imagine how I could attain my end.

Next day I went down to the great building where the address was to be
given and managed by bribing the porter to get into the outer Hall.
The huge audience was assembling in a room beyond. I tried further
bribing that I might be slipped in, but the official became abusive.
People streamed past me, but I was always the waiter at the gate.
Finally every one had gone in and then a group of men came bustling
across, Bergmann, bearded and formidable, in the van, with a tail of
house surgeons and satellites behind him. I threw myself across his
path. “I have come a thousand miles,” said I. “May I not come in?” He
halted and glared at me through his spectacles. “Perhaps you would like
to take my place,” he roared, working himself up into that strange
folly of excitement which seems so strange in the heavy German nature.
“That is the only place left. Yes, yes, take my place by all means. My
classes are filled with Englishmen already.” He fairly spat out the
word “Englishmen” and I learned afterwards that some recent quarrel
with Morel MacKenzie over the illness of the Emperor Frederick had
greatly incensed him. I am glad to say that I kept my temper and my
polite manner, which is always the best shield when one is met by
brutal rudeness. “Not at all,” I said. “I would not intrude, if there
was really no room.” He glared at me again, all beard and spectacles,
and rushed on with his court all grinning at the snub which the
presumptuous Englishman had received. One of them lingered, however--a
kindly American. “That was bad behaviour,” said he. “See here! If you
meet me at four this afternoon I will show you my full notes of the
lecture, and I know the cases he is about to show, so we can see them
together to-morrow.” Then he followed on.

So it came about that I attained my end after all, but in a roundabout
way. I studied the lecture and the cases, and I had the temerity to
disagree with every one and to come to the conclusion that the whole
thing was experimental and premature. A wave of madness had seized the
world and from all parts, notably from England, poor afflicted people
were rushing to Berlin for a cure, some of them in such advanced stages
of disease that they died in the train. I felt so sure of my ground and
so strongly about it that I wrote a letter of warning to “The Daily
Telegraph,” and I rather think that this letter was the very first
which appeared upon the side of doubt and caution. I need not say that
the event proved the truth of my forecast.

Two days later I was back in Southsea, but I came back a changed man.
I had spread my wings and had felt something of the powers within me.
Especially I had been influenced by a long talk with Malcolm Morris, in
which he assured me that I was wasting my life in the provinces and had
too small a field for my activities. He insisted that I should leave
general practice and go to London. I answered that I was by no means
sure of my literary success as yet, and that I could not so easily
abandon the medical career which had cost my mother such sacrifices and
myself so many years of study. He asked me if there was any special
branch of the profession on which I could concentrate so as to get away
from general practice. I said that of late years I had been interested
in eye work and had amused myself by correcting refractions and
ordering glasses in the Portsmouth Eye Hospital under Mr. Vernon Ford.
“Well,” said Morris, “why not specialize upon the eye? Go to Vienna,
put in six months’ work, come back and start in London. Thus you will
have a nice clean life with plenty of leisure for your literature.” I
came home with this great suggestion buzzing in my head and as my wife
was quite willing and Mary, my little girl, was old enough now to be
left with her grandmother, there seemed to be no obstacle in the way.
There were no difficulties about disposing of the practice, for it was
so small and so purely personal that it could not be sold to another
and simply had to dissolve.

The Portsmouth Literary and Scientific Society gave me a God-speed
banquet. I have many pleasant and some comic reminiscences of this
Society, of which I had been secretary for several years. We kept
the sacred flame burning in the old city with our weekly papers and
discussions during the long winters. It was there I learned to face
an audience, which proved to be of the first importance for my life’s
work. I was naturally of a very nervous, backward, self-distrustful
disposition in such things and I have been told that the signal that
I was about to join in the discussion was that the whole long bench
on which I sat, with every one on it, used to shake with my emotion.
But once up I learned to speak out, to conceal my trepidations, and to
choose my phrases. I gave three papers, one on the Arctic seas, one
on Carlyle and one on Gibbon. The former gave me a quite unmerited
reputation as a sportsman, for I borrowed from a local taxidermist
every bird and beast that he possessed which could conceivably find
its way into the Arctic Circle. These I piled upon the lecture table,
and the audience, concluding that I had shot them all, looked upon me
with great respect. Next morning they were back with the taxidermist
once more. We had some weird people and incidents at these debates.
I remember one very learned discussion on fossils and the age of
the strata, which was ended by a cadaverous major-general of the
Evangelical persuasion who rose and said in a hollow voice that all
this speculation was vain, and indeed incomprehensible, since we knew
on an authority which could not possibly be questioned that the world
was made exactly five thousand eight hundred and ninety years ago. This
put the lid on the debate and we all crept home to bed.

My political work also caused me to learn to speak. I was what was
called a Liberal-Unionist, that is, a man whose general position was
Liberal, but who could not see his way to support Gladstone’s Irish
Policy. Perhaps we were wrong. However, that was my view at the time. I
had a dreadful first experience of platform speaking on a large scale,
for at a huge meeting at the Amphitheatre the candidate, Sir William
Crossman, was delayed, and to prevent a fiasco I was pushed on at a
moment’s notice to face an audience of 3,000 people. It was one of the
tight corners of my life. I hardly knew myself what I said, but the
Irish part of me came to my aid and supplied me with a torrent of more
or less incoherent words and similes which roused the audience greatly,
though it read to me afterwards more like a comic stump speech than a
serious political effort. But it was what they wanted and they were
mostly on their feet before I finished. I was amazed when I read it
next day, and especially the last crowning sentence which was: “England
and Ireland are wedded together with the sapphire wedding ring of the
sea, and what God has placed together let no man pluck asunder.” It was
not very good logic but whether it was eloquence or rodomontade I could
not even now determine.

I was acting Secretary when Mr. Balfour came down to address a great
meeting and, as such, when the Hall was full, I waited on the curb
outside to receive him. Presently his carriage drove up and out he
stepped, tall, thin and aristocratic. There were two notorious artisans
of the other side waiting for him and I warned them not to make
trouble. However, the moment Balfour appeared one of them opened a
huge mouth with the intention of emitting a howl of execration. But it
never got out, for I clapped my hand pretty forcibly over the orifice
while I held him by the neck with the other hand. His companion hit me
on the head with a stick, and was promptly knocked down by one of my
companions. Meanwhile Balfour got safely in, and we two secretaries
followed, rather dishevelled after our adventure. I met Lord Balfour
several times in after life but I never told him how I once had my hat
smashed in his defence.

What with the Literary Society and the politicians I left a gap behind
me in Portsmouth and so did my wife, who was universally popular for
her amiable and generous character. It was a wrench to us to leave so
many good friends. However, towards the end of 1890 the die was cast,
and we closed the door of Bush Villa behind us for the last time. I had
days of privation there, and days of growing success during the eight
long years that I had spent in Portsmouth. Now it was with a sense of
wonderful freedom and exhilarating adventure that we set forth upon the
next phase of our lives.




CHAPTER X

THE GREAT BREAK

 Vienna--A Specialist in Wimpole Street--The Great
 Decision--Norwood--“The Refugees”--Reported Death of Holmes.


We set forth upon a bitter winter day at the close of 1890 with every
chance of being snowed up on our long trek. We got through all right,
however, and found ourselves in Vienna, arriving on a deadly cold
night, with deep snow under foot and a cutting blizzard in the air. As
we looked from the station the electric lights threw out the shining
silver drift of snow flakes against the absolute darkness of the sky.
It was a gloomy, ominous reception, but half an hour afterwards when we
were in the warm cosy crowded tobacco-laden restaurant attached to our
hotel we took a more cheerful view of our surroundings.

We found a modest _pension_ which was within our means, and we put in
a very pleasant four months, during which I attended eye lectures at
the Krankenhaus, but could certainly have learned far more in London,
for even if one has a fair knowledge of conversational German it is
very different from following accurately a rapid lecture filled with
technical terms. No doubt “has studied in Vienna” sounds well in a
specialist’s record, but it is usually taken for granted that he has
exhausted his own country before going abroad, which was by no means
the case with me. Therefore, so far as eye work goes, my winter was
wasted, nor can I trace any particular spiritual or intellectual
advance. On the other hand I saw a little of gay Viennese society. I
received kind and welcome hospitality from Brinsley Richards, “The
Times” correspondent, and his wife, and I had some excellent skating.
I also wrote one short book, “The Doings of Raffles Haw,” not a
very notable achievement, by which I was able to pay my current
expenses without encroaching on the very few hundred pounds which were
absolutely all that I had in the world. This money was invested on the
advice of a friend, and as it was almost all lost--like so much more
that I have earned--it is just as well that I was never driven back
upon it.

With the spring my work at Vienna had finished, if it can be said to
have ever begun, and we returned via Paris, putting in a few days there
with Landolt, who was the most famous French oculist of his time. It
was great to find ourselves back in London once more with the feeling
that we were now on the real field of battle, where we must conquer or
perish, for our boats were burned behind us. It is easy now to look
back and think that the issue was clear, but it was by no means so at
the time, for I had earned little, though my reputation was growing. It
was only my own inward conviction of the permanent merits of “The White
Company,” still appearing month by month in “Cornhill,” which sustained
my confidence. I had come through so much in the early days at Southsea
that nothing could alarm me personally, but I had a wife and child now,
and the stern simplicity of life which was possible and even pleasant
in early days was now no longer to be thought of.

We took rooms in Montague Place, and I went forth to search for some
place where I could put up my plate as an oculist. I was aware that
many of the big men do not find time to work out refractions, which
in some cases of astigmatism take a long time to adjust when done by
retinoscopy. I was capable in this work and liked it, so I hoped that
some of it might drift my way. But to get it, it was clearly necessary
that I should live among the big men so that the patient could be
easily referred to me. I searched the doctors’ quarters and at last
found suitable accommodation at 2 Devonshire Place, which is at the top
of Wimpole Street and close to the classical Harley Street. There for
£120 a year I got the use of a front room with part use of a waiting
room. I was soon to find that they were both waiting rooms, and now I
know that it was better so.

Every morning I walked from the lodgings at Montague Place, reached my
consulting room at ten and sat there until three or four, with never
a ring to disturb my serenity. Could better conditions for reflection
and work be found? It was ideal, and so long as I was thoroughly
unsuccessful in my professional venture there was every chance of
improvement in my literary prospects. Therefore when I returned to the
lodgings at tea-time I bore my little sheaves with me, the first fruits
of a considerable harvest.

A number of monthly magazines were coming out at that time, notable
among which was “The Strand,” then as now under the editorship of
Greenhough Smith. Considering these various journals with their
disconnected stories it had struck me that a single character running
through a series, if it only engaged the attention of the reader, would
bind that reader to that particular magazine. On the other hand, it
had long seemed to me that the ordinary serial might be an impediment
rather than a help to a magazine, since, sooner or later, one missed
one number and afterwards it had lost all interest. Clearly the ideal
compromise was a character which carried through, and yet instalments
which were each complete in themselves, so that the purchaser was
always sure that he could relish the whole contents of the magazine. I
believe that I was the first to realize this and “The Strand Magazine”
the first to put it into practice.

Looking round for my central character I felt that Sherlock Holmes,
whom I had already handled in two little books, would easily lend
himself to a succession of short stories. These I began in the long
hours of waiting in my consulting room. Greenhough Smith liked them
from the first, and encouraged me to go ahead with them. My literary
affairs had been taken up by that king of agents, A. P. Watt, who
relieved me of all the hateful bargaining, and handled things so well
that any immediate anxiety for money soon disappeared. It was as well,
for not one single patient had ever crossed the threshold of my room.

I was now once more at a crossroads of my life, and Providence, which
I recognize at every step, made me realize it in a very energetic and
unpleasant way. I was starting off for my usual trudge one morning
from our lodgings when icy shivers passed over me, and I only got
back in time to avoid a total collapse. It was a virulent attack of
influenza, at a time when influenza was in its deadly prime. Only three
years before my dear sister Annette, after spending her whole life on
the family needs, had died of it at Lisbon at the very moment when my
success would have enabled me to recall her from her long servitude.
Now it was my turn, and I very nearly followed her. I can remember
no pain or extreme discomfort, and no psychic experiences, but for a
week I was in great danger, and then found myself as weak as a child
and as emotional, but with a mind as clear as crystal. It was then,
as I surveyed my own life, that I saw how foolish I was to waste my
literary earnings in keeping up an oculist’s room in Wimpole Street,
and I determined with a wild rush of joy to cut the painter and to
trust for ever to my power of writing. I remember in my delight taking
the handkerchief which lay upon the coverlet in my enfeebled hand, and
tossing it up to the ceiling in my exultation. I should at last be my
own master. No longer would I have to conform to professional dress or
try to please any one else. I would be free to live how I liked and
where I liked. It was one of the great moments of exultation of my
life. The date was in August, 1891.

Presently I was about, hobbling on a stick and reflecting that if I
lived to be eighty I knew already exactly how it would feel. I haunted
house-agents, got lists of suburban villas, and spent some weeks, as
my strength returned, in searching for a new home. Finally I found a
suitable house, modest but comfortable, isolated and yet one of a row.
It was 12 Tennison Road, South Norwood. There we settled down, and
there I made my first effort to live entirely by my pen. It soon became
evident that I had been playing the game well within my powers and that
I should have no difficulty in providing a sufficient income. It seemed
as if I had settled into a life which might be continuous, and I little
foresaw that an unexpected blow was about to fall upon us, and that we
were not at the end, but really at the beginning, of our wanderings.

I could not know this, however, and I settled down with a stout
heart to do some literary work worthy of the name. The difficulty of
the Holmes work was that every story really needed as clear-cut and
original a plot as a longish book would do. One cannot without effort
spin plots at such a rate. They are apt to become thin or to break.
I was determined, now that I had no longer the excuse of absolute
pecuniary pressure, never again to write anything which was not as good
as I could possibly make it, and therefore I would not write a Holmes
story without a worthy plot and without a problem which interested my
own mind, for that is the first requisite before you can interest any
one else. If I have been able to sustain this character for a long
time and if the public find, as they will find, that the last story is
as good as the first, it is entirely due to the fact that I never, or
hardly ever, forced a story. Some have thought there was a falling off
in the stories, and the criticism was neatly expressed by a Cornish
boatman who said to me, “I think, sir, when Holmes fell over that
cliff, he may not have killed himself, but all the same he was never
quite the same man afterwards.” I think, however, that if the reader
began the series backwards, so that he brought a fresh mind to the last
stories, he would agree with me that, though the general average may
not be conspicuously high, still the last one is as good as the first.

I was weary, however, of inventing plots and I set myself now to do
some work which would certainly be less remunerative but would be more
ambitious from a literary point of view. I had long been attracted
by the epoch of Louis XIV and by those Huguenots who were the French
equivalents of our Puritans. I had a good knowledge of the memoirs
of that date, and many notes already prepared, so that it did not
take me long to write “The Refugees.” It has stood the acid test of
time very well, so I may say that it was a success. Soon after its
appearance it was translated into French, and my mother, herself a
great French scholar, had the joy when she visited Fontainebleau to
hear the official guide tell the drove of tourists that if they really
wanted to know about the Court of the great monarch, they would find
the clearest and most accurate account in an Englishman’s book, “The
Refugees.” I expect the guide would have been considerably astonished
had he then and there been kissed by an elderly English lady, but it
was an experience which he must have narrowly missed. I used in this
book, also, a great deal which was drawn from Parkman, that great but
neglected historian, who was in my opinion the greatest serious writer
that America has produced.

There was an amusing episode connected with “The Refugees,” when it was
read aloud in some strict Irish convent, the innocent Reverend Mother
having mistaken my name and imagined that I was a canon, and therefore
of course a holy man. I am told that the reading was a tremendous
success and that the good sisters rejoiced that the mistake was not
found out until the story was completed. My first name has several
times led to mistakes, as when, at a big dinner at Chicago, I was asked
to say Grace, as being the only ecclesiastic present. I remember that
at the same dinner one of the speakers remarked that it was a most
sinister fact that though I was a doctor no _living_ patient of mine
had ever yet been seen.

During this Norwood interval, I was certainly working hard, for besides
“The Refugees” I wrote “The Great Shadow,” a booklet which I should put
near the front of my work for merit, and two other little books on a
very inferior plane--“The Parasite” and “Beyond the City.” The latter
was of a domestic type unusual for me. It was pirated in New York just
before the new Copyright Act came into force, and the rascal publisher
thinking that a portrait--any sort of portrait--of the author would
look well upon the cover, and being quite ignorant of my identity, put
a very pretty and over-dressed young woman as my presentment. I still
preserve a copy of this most flattering representation. All these books
had some decent success, though none of it was remarkable. It was still
the Sherlock Holmes stories for which the public clamoured, and these
from time to time I endeavoured to supply. At last, after I had done
two series of them I saw that I was in danger of having my hand forced,
and of being entirely identified with what I regarded as a lower
stratum of literary achievement. Therefore as a sign of my resolution
I determined to end the life of my hero. The idea was in my mind when
I went with my wife for a short holiday in Switzerland, in the course
of which we saw there the wonderful falls of Reichenbach, a terrible
place, and one that I thought would make a worthy tomb for poor
Sherlock, even if I buried my banking account along with him. So there
I laid him, fully determined that he should stay there--as indeed for
some years he did. I was amazed at the concern expressed by the public.
They say that a man is never properly appreciated until he is dead,
and the general protest against my summary execution of Holmes taught
me how many and how numerous were his friends. “You Brute” was the
beginning of the letter of remonstrance which one lady sent me, and I
expect she spoke for others besides herself. I heard of many who wept.
I fear I was utterly callous myself, and only glad to have a chance of
opening out into new fields of imagination, for the temptation of high
prices made it difficult to get one’s thoughts away from Holmes.

That Sherlock Holmes was anything but mythical to many is shown by the
fact that I have had many letters addressed to him with requests that I
forward them. Watson has also had a number of letters in which he has
been asked for the address or for the autograph of his more brilliant
confrère. A press-cutting agency wrote to Watson asking whether Holmes
would not wish to subscribe. When Holmes retired several elderly
ladies were ready to keep house for him and one sought to ingratiate
herself by assuring me that she knew all about bee-keeping and could
“segregate the queen.” I had considerable offers also for Holmes if he
would examine and solve various family mysteries. Once the offer--from
Poland--was that I should myself go, and my reward was practically
left to my own judgment. I had judgment enough, however, to avoid it
altogether.

I have often been asked whether I had myself the qualities which I
depicted, or whether I was merely the Watson that I look. Of course I
am well aware that it is one thing to grapple with a practical problem
and quite another thing when you are allowed to solve it under your
own conditions. I have no delusions about that. At the same time a man
cannot spin a character out of his own inner consciousness and make it
really life-like unless he has some possibilities of that character
within him--which is a dangerous admission for one who has drawn
so many villains as I. In my poem “The Inner Room,” describing our
multiplex personality, I say:

    “There are others who are sitting,
      Grim as doom,
    In the dim ill-boding shadow
      Of my room.
    Darkling figures, stern or quaint,
    Now a savage, now a saint,
    Showing fitfully and faint
      In the gloom.”

Among those figures there may perhaps be an astute detective also, but
I find that in real life in order to find him I have to inhibit all the
others and get into a mood when there is no one in the room but he.
Then I get results and have several times solved problems by Holmes’
methods after the police have been baffled. Yet I must admit that in
ordinary life I am by no means observant and that I have to throw
myself into an artificial frame of mind before I can weigh evidence and
anticipate the sequence of events.




CHAPTER XI

SIDELIGHTS ON SHERLOCK HOLMES

 “The Speckled Band”--Barrie’s Parody on Holmes--Holmes on the
 Films--Methods of Construction--Problems--Curious Letters--Some
 Personal Cases--Strange Happenings.


I may as well interrupt my narrative here in order to say what may
interest my readers about my most notorious character.

The impression that Holmes was a real person of flesh and blood may
have been intensified by his frequent appearance upon the stage. After
the withdrawal of my dramatization of “Rodney Stone” from a theatre
upon which I held a six months’ lease, I determined to play a bold and
energetic game, for an empty theatre spells ruin. When I saw the course
that things were taking I shut myself up and devoted my whole mind to
making a sensational Sherlock Holmes drama. I wrote it in a week and
called it “The Speckled Band” after the short story of that name. I do
not think that I exaggerate if I say that within a fortnight of the
one play shutting down I had a company working upon the rehearsals
of a second one, which had been written in the interval. It was a
considerable success. Lyn Harding, as the half epileptic and wholly
formidable Doctor Grimesby Rylott, was most masterful, while Saintsbury
as Sherlock Holmes was also very good. Before the end of the run I
had cleared off all that I had lost upon the other play, and I had
created a permanent property of some value. It became a stock piece and
is even now touring the country. We had a fine rock boa to play the
title-rôle, a snake which was the pride of my heart, so one can imagine
my disgust when I saw that one critic ended his disparaging review by
the words “The crisis of the play was produced by the appearance of
a palpably artificial serpent.” I was inclined to offer him a goodly
sum if he would undertake to go to bed with it. We had several snakes
at different times, but they were none of them born actors and they
were all inclined either to hang down from the hole in the wall like
inanimate bell-pulls, or else to turn back through the hole and get
even with the stage carpenter who pinched their tails in order to make
them more lively. Finally we used artificial snakes, and every one,
including the stage carpenter, agreed that it was more satisfactory.

This was the second Sherlock Holmes play. I should have spoken about
the first, which was produced very much earlier, in fact at the time of
the African war. It was written and most wonderfully acted by William
Gillette, the famous American. Since he used my characters and to some
extent my plots, he naturally gave me a share in the undertaking, which
proved to be very successful. “May I marry Holmes?” was one cable which
I received from him when in the throes of composition. “You may marry
or murder or do what you like with him,” was my heartless reply. I was
charmed both with the play, the acting and the pecuniary result. I
think that every man with a drop of artistic blood in his veins would
agree that the latter consideration, though very welcome when it does
arrive, is still the last of which he thinks.

Sir James Barrie paid his respects to Sherlock Holmes in a rollicking
parody. It was really a gay gesture of resignation over the failure
which we had encountered with a comic opera for which he undertook to
write the libretto. I collaborated with him on this, but in spite of
our joint efforts, the piece fell flat. Whereupon Barrie sent me a
parody on Holmes, written on the fly leaves of one of his books. It ran
thus:--


 THE ADVENTURE OF THE TWO COLLABORATORS

 In bringing to a close the adventures of my friend Sherlock Holmes I
 am perforce reminded that he never, save on the occasion which, as you
 will now hear, brought his singular career to an end, consented to act
 in any mystery which was concerned with persons who made a livelihood
 by their pen. “I am not particular about the people I mix among for
 business purposes,” he would say, “but at literary characters I draw
 the line.”

 We were in our rooms in Baker Street one evening. I was (I remember)
 by the centre table writing out “The Adventure of the Man without a
 Cork Leg” (which had so puzzled the Royal Society and all the other
 scientific bodies of Europe), and Holmes was amusing himself with
 a little revolver practice. It was his custom of a summer evening
 to fire round my head, just shaving my face, until he had made a
 photograph of me on the opposite wall, and it is a slight proof of
 his skill that many of these portraits in pistol shots are considered
 admirable likenesses.

 I happened to look out of the window, and perceiving two gentlemen
 advancing rapidly along Baker Street asked him who they were. He
 immediately lit his pipe, and, twisting himself on a chair into the
 figure 8, replied:

 “They are two collaborators in comic opera, and their play has not
 been a triumph.”

 I sprang from my chair to the ceiling in amazement, and he then
 explained:

 “My dear Watson, they are obviously men who follow some low calling.
 That much even you should be able to read in their faces. Those little
 pieces of blue paper which they fling angrily from them are Durrant’s
 Press Notices. Of these they have obviously hundreds about their
 person (see how their pockets bulge). They would not dance on them if
 they were pleasant reading.”

 I again sprang to the ceiling (which is much dented), and shouted:
 “Amazing! but they may be mere authors.”

 “No,” said Holmes, “for mere authors only get one press notice a week.
 Only criminals, dramatists and actors get them by the hundred.”

 “Then they may be actors.”

 “No, actors would come in a carriage.”

 “Can you tell me anything else about them?”

 “A great deal. From the mud on the boots of the tall one I perceive
 that he comes from South Norwood. The other is as obviously a Scotch
 author.”

 “How can you tell that?”

 “He is carrying in his pocket a book called (I clearly see) ‘Auld
 Licht Something.’ Would any one but the author be likely to carry
 about a book with such a title?”

 I had to confess that this was improbable.

 It was now evident that the two men (if such they can be called) were
 seeking our lodgings. I have said (often) that my friend Holmes seldom
 gave way to emotion of any kind, but he now turned livid with passion.
 Presently this gave place to a strange look of triumph.

 “Watson,” he said, “that big fellow has for years taken the credit for
 my most remarkable doings, but at last I have him--at last!”

 Up I went to the ceiling, and when I returned the strangers were in
 the room.

 “I perceive, gentlemen,” said Mr. Sherlock Holmes, “that you are at
 present afflicted by an extraordinary novelty.”

 The handsomer of our visitors asked in amazement how he knew this, but
 the big one only scowled.

 “You forget that you wear a ring on your fourth finger,” replied Mr.
 Holmes calmly.

 I was about to jump to the ceiling when the big brute interposed.

 “That Tommy-rot is all very well for the public, Holmes,” said he,
 “but you can drop it before me. And, Watson, if you go up to the
 ceiling again I shall make you stay there.”

 Here I observed a curious phenomenon. My friend Sherlock Holmes
 _shrank_. He became small before my eyes. I looked longingly at the
 ceiling, but dared not.

 “Let us cut the first four pages,” said the big man, “and proceed to
 business. I want to know why----”

 “Allow me,” said Mr. Holmes, with some of his old courage. “You want
 to know why the public does not go to your opera.”

 “Exactly,” said the other ironically, “as you perceive by my shirt
 stud.” He added more gravely, “And as you can only find out in one way
 I must insist on your witnessing an entire performance of the piece.”

 It was an anxious moment for me. I shuddered, for I knew that if
 Holmes went I should have to go with him. But my friend had a heart
 of gold. “Never,” he cried fiercely, “I will do anything for you save
 that.”

 “Your continued existence depends on it,” said the big man menacingly.

 “I would rather melt into air,” replied Holmes, proudly taking another
 chair. “But I can tell you why the public don’t go to your piece
 without sitting the thing out myself.”

 “Why?”

 “Because,” replied Holmes calmly, “they prefer to stay away.”

 A dead silence followed that extraordinary remark. For a moment the
 two intruders gazed with awe upon the man who had unravelled their
 mystery so wonderfully. Then drawing their knives----

 Holmes grew less and less, until nothing was left save a ring of smoke
 which slowly circled to the ceiling.

 The last words of great men are often noteworthy. These were the last
 words of Sherlock Holmes: “Fool, fool! I have kept you in luxury for
 years. By my help you have ridden extensively in cabs, where no author
 was ever seen before. _Henceforth you will ride in buses!_”

 The brute sunk into a chair aghast.

 The other author did not turn a hair.

  _To A. Conan Doyle,
  from his friend
  J. M. Barrie._


This parody, the best of all the numerous parodies, may be taken as an
example not only of the author’s wit but of his debonnaire courage,
for it was written immediately after our joint failure which at the
moment was a bitter thought for both of us. There is indeed nothing
more miserable than a theatrical failure, for you feel how many others
who have backed you have been affected by it. It was, I am glad to say,
my only experience of it, and I have no doubt that Barrie could say the
same.

Before I leave the subject of the many impersonations of Holmes I may
say that all of them, and all the drawings, are very unlike my own
original idea of the man. I saw him as very tall--“over 6 feet, but so
excessively lean that he seemed considerably taller,” said “A Study
in Scarlet.” He had, as I imagined him, a thin razor-like face, with
a great hawks-bill of a nose, and two small eyes, set close together
on either side of it. Such was my conception. It chanced, however,
that poor Sidney Paget who, before his premature death, drew all the
original pictures, had a younger brother whose name, I think, was
Walter, who served him as a model. The handsome Walter took the place
of the more powerful but uglier Sherlock, and perhaps from the point of
view of my lady readers it was as well. The stage has followed the type
set up by the pictures.

Films of course were unknown when the stories appeared, and when these
rights were finally discussed and a small sum offered for them by a
French Company it seemed treasure trove and I was very glad to accept.
Afterwards I had to buy them back again at exactly ten times what I had
received, so the deal was a disastrous one. But now they have been done
by the Stoll Company with Eille Norwood as Holmes, and it was worth
all the expense to get so fine a production. Norwood has since played
the part on the stage and won the approbation of the London public. He
has that rare quality which can only be described as glamour, which
compels you to watch an actor eagerly even when he is doing nothing. He
has the brooding eye which excites expectation and he has also a quite
unrivalled power of disguise. My only criticism of the films is that
they introduce telephones, motor cars and other luxuries of which the
Victorian Holmes never dreamed.

People have often asked me whether I knew the end of a Holmes story
before I started it. Of course I do. One could not possibly steer
a course if one did not know one’s destination. The first thing is
to get your idea. Having got that key idea one’s next task is to
conceal it and lay emphasis upon everything which can make for a
different explanation. Holmes, however, can see all the fallacies of
the alternatives, and arrives more or less dramatically at the true
solution by steps which he can describe and justify. He shows his
powers by what the South Americans now call “Sherlockholmitos,” which
means clever little deductions which often have nothing to do with
the matter in hand, but impress the reader with a general sense of
power. The same effect is gained by his offhand allusion to other
cases. Heaven knows how many titles I have thrown about in a casual
way, and how many readers have begged me to satisfy their curiosity as
to “Rigoletto and his abominable wife,” “The Adventure of the Tired
Captain,” or “The Curious Experience of the Patterson Family in the
Island of Uffa.” Once or twice, as in “The Adventure of the Second
Stain,” which in my judgment is one of the neatest of the stories, I
did actually use the title years before I wrote a story to correspond.

There are some questions concerned with particular stories which turn
up periodically from every quarter of the globe. In “The Adventure of
the Priory School” Holmes remarks in his offhand way that by looking at
a bicycle track on a damp moor one can say which way it was heading.
I had so many remonstrances upon this point, varying from pity to
anger, that I took out my bicycle and tried. I had imagined that the
observations of the way in which the track of the hind wheel overlaid
the track of the front one when the machine was not running dead
straight would show the direction. I found that my correspondents were
right and I was wrong, for this would be the same whichever way the
cycle was moving. On the other hand the real solution was much simpler,
for on an undulating moor the wheels make a much deeper impression
uphill and a more shallow one downhill, so Holmes was justified of his
wisdom after all.

Sometimes I have got upon dangerous ground where I have taken risks
through my own want of knowledge of the correct atmosphere. I have, for
example, never been a racing man, and yet I ventured to write “Silver
Blaze,” in which the mystery depends upon the laws of training and
racing. The story is all right, and Holmes may have been at the top of
his form, but my ignorance cries aloud to heaven. I read an excellent
and very damaging criticism of the story in some sporting paper,
written clearly by a man who _did_ know, in which he explained the
exact penalties which would have come upon every one concerned if they
had acted as I described. Half would have been in jail and the other
half warned off the turf for ever. However, I have never been nervous
about details, and one must be masterful sometimes. When an alarmed
Editor wrote to me once: “There is no second line of rails at that
point,” I answered, “I make one.” On the other hand, there are cases
where accuracy is essential.

I do not wish to be ungrateful to Holmes, who has been a good friend
to me in many ways. If I have sometimes been inclined to weary of
him it is because his character admits of no light or shade. He is a
calculating machine, and anything you add to that simply weakens the
effect. Thus the variety of the stories must depend upon the romance
and compact handling of the plots. I would say a word for Watson also,
who in the course of seven volumes never shows one gleam of humour or
makes one single joke. To make a real character one must sacrifice
everything to consistency and remember Goldsmith’s criticism of Johnson
that “he would make the little fishes talk like whales.”

I do not think that I ever realized what a living actual personality
Holmes had become to the more guileless readers, until I heard of the
very pleasing story of the char-à-bancs of French schoolboys who, when
asked what they wanted to see first in London, replied unanimously that
they wanted to see Mr. Holmes’ lodgings in Baker Street. Many have
asked me which house it is, but that is a point which for excellent
reasons I will not decide.

There are certain Sherlock Holmes stories, apocryphal I need not say,
which go round and round the press and turn up at fixed intervals with
the regularity of a comet.

One is the story of the cabman who is supposed to have taken me to
an hotel in Paris. “Dr. Doyle,” he cried, gazing at me fixedly,
“I perceive from your appearance that you have been recently at
Constantinople. I have reason to think also that you have been at Buda,
and I perceive some indication that you were not far from Milan.”
“Wonderful. Five francs for the secret of how you did it?” “I looked at
the labels pasted on your trunk,” said the astute cabby.

Another perennial is of the woman who is said to have consulted
Sherlock. “I am greatly puzzled, sir. In one week I have lost a motor
horn, a brush, a box of golf balls, a dictionary and a bootjack. Can
you explain it?” “Nothing simpler, madame,” said Sherlock. “It is
clear that your neighbour keeps a goat.”

There was a third about how Sherlock entered heaven, and by virtue of
his power of observation at once greeted Adam but the point is perhaps
too anatomical for further discussion.

I suppose that every author receives a good many curious letters.
Certainly I have done so. Quite a number of these have been from
Russia. When they have been in the vernacular I have been compelled to
take them as read, but when they have been in English they have been
among the most curious in my collection.

There was one young lady who began all her epistles with the words
“Good Lord.” Another had a large amount of guile underlying her
simplicity. Writing from Warsaw, she stated that she had been bedridden
for two years, and that my novels had been her only, etc., etc. So
touched was I by this flattering statement that I at once prepared an
autographed parcel of them to complete the fair invalid’s collection.
By good luck, however, I met a brother author on the same day to whom
I recounted the touching incident. With a cynical smile, he drew an
identical letter from his pocket. His novels had also been for two
years her only, etc., etc. I do not know how many more the lady had
written to; but if, as I imagine, her correspondence had extended to
several countries, she must have amassed a rather interesting library.

The young Russian’s habit of addressing me as “Good Lord” had an even
stranger parallel at home which links it up with the subject of this
article. Shortly after I received a knighthood, I had a bill from a
tradesman which was quite correct and businesslike in every detail save
that it was made out to Sir Sherlock Holmes. I hope that I can stand
a joke as well as my neighbours, but this particular piece of humour
seemed rather misapplied and I wrote sharply upon the subject.

In response to my letter there arrived at my hotel a very repentant
clerk, who expressed his sorrow at the incident, but kept on repeating
the phrase, “I assure you, sir, that it was bonâ fide.”

“What do you mean by bonâ fide?” I asked.

“Well, sir,” he replied, “my mates in the shop told me that you had
been knighted, and that when a man was knighted he changed his name,
and that you had taken that one.”

I need not say that my annoyance vanished, and that I laughed as
heartily as his pals were probably doing round the corner.

A few of the problems which have come my way have been very similar to
some which I had invented for the exhibition of the reasoning of Mr.
Holmes. I might perhaps quote one in which that gentleman’s method of
thought was copied with complete success. The case was as follows: A
gentleman had disappeared. He had drawn a bank balance of £40 which
was known to be on him. It was feared that he had been murdered for
the sake of the money. He had last been heard of stopping at a large
hotel in London, having come from the country that day. In the evening
he went to a music-hall performance, came out of it about ten o’clock,
returned to his hotel, changed his evening clothes, which were found in
his room next day, and disappeared utterly. No one saw him leave the
hotel, but a man occupying a neighbouring room declared that he had
heard him moving during the night. A week had elapsed at the time that
I was consulted, but the police had discovered nothing. Where was the
man?

These were the whole of the facts as communicated to me by his
relatives in the country. Endeavouring to see the matter through the
eyes of Mr. Holmes, I answered by return mail that he was evidently
either in Glasgow or in Edinburgh. It proved later that he had, as a
fact, gone to Edinburgh, though in the week that had passed he had
moved to another part of Scotland.

There I should leave the matter, for, as Dr. Watson has often shown,
a solution explained is a mystery spoiled. At this stage the reader
can lay down the book and show how simple it all is by working out the
problem for himself. He has all the data which were ever given to me.
For the sake of those, however, who have no turn for such conundrums, I
will try to indicate the links which make the chain. The one advantage
which I possessed was that I was familiar with the routine of London
hotels--though I fancy it differs little from that of hotels elsewhere.

The first thing was to look at the facts and separate what was certain
from what was conjecture. It was _all_ certain except the statement of
the person who heard the missing man in the night. How could he tell
such a sound from any other sound in a large hotel? That point could be
disregarded, if it traversed the general conclusions.

The first clear deduction was that the man had meant to disappear.
Why else should he draw all his money? He had got out of the hotel
during the night. But there is a night porter in all hotels, and it is
impossible to get out without his knowledge when the door is once shut.
The door is shut after the theatre-goers return--say at twelve o’clock.
Therefore, the man left the hotel before twelve o’clock. He had come
from the music-hall at ten, had changed his clothes, and had departed
with his bag. No one had seen him do so. The inference is that he had
done it at the moment when the hall was full of the returning guests,
which is from eleven to eleven-thirty. After that hour, even if the
door were still open, there are few people coming and going so that he
with his bag would certainly have been seen.

Having got so far upon firm ground, we now ask ourselves why a man who
desires to hide himself should go out at such an hour. If he intended
to conceal himself in London he need never have gone to the hotel at
all. Clearly then he was going to catch a train which would carry him
away. But a man who is deposited by a train in any provincial station
during the night is likely to be noticed, and he might be sure that
when the alarm was raised and his description given, some guard or
porter would remember him. Therefore, his destination would be some
large town which he would reach as a terminus where all his fellow
passengers would disembark and where he would lose himself in the
crowd. When one turns up the time-table and sees that the great Scotch
expresses bound for Edinburgh and Glasgow start about midnight, the
goal is reached. As for his dress-suit, the fact that he abandoned it
proved that he intended to adopt a line of life where there were no
social amenities. This deduction also proved to be correct.

I quote such a case in order to show that the general lines of
reasoning advocated by Holmes have a real practical application to
life. In another case, where a girl had become engaged to a young
foreigner who suddenly disappeared, I was able, by a similar process of
deduction, to show her very clearly both whither he had gone and how
unworthy he was of her affections.

On the other hand, these semi-scientific methods are occasionally
laboured and slow as compared with the results of the rough-and-ready,
practical man. Lest I should seem to have been throwing bouquets either
to myself or to Mr. Holmes, let me state that on the occasion of a
burglary of the village inn, within a stone-throw of my house, the
village constable, with no theories at all, had seized the culprit
while I had got no further than that he was a left-handed man with
nails in his boots.

The unusual or dramatic effects which lead to the invocation of Mr.
Holmes in fiction are, of course, great aids to him in reaching a
conclusion. It is the case where there is nothing to get hold of
which is the deadly one. I heard of such a one in America which would
certainly have presented a formidable problem. A gentleman of blameless
life starting off for a Sunday evening walk with his family, suddenly
observed that he had forgotten something. He went back into the house,
the door of which was still open, and he left his people waiting for
him outside. He never reappeared, and from that day to this there has
been no clue as to what befell him. This was certainly one of the
strangest cases of which I have ever heard in real life.

Another very singular case came within my own observation. It was
sent to me by an eminent London publisher. This gentleman had in his
employment a head of department whose name we shall take as Musgrave.
He was a hardworking person, with no special feature in his character.
Mr. Musgrave died, and several years after his death a letter was
received addressed to him, in the care of his employers. It bore the
postmark of a tourist resort in the west of Canada, and had the note
“Conflfilms” upon the outside of the envelope, with the words “Report
Sy” in one corner.

The publishers naturally opened the envelope as they had no note of
the dead man’s relatives. Inside were two blank sheets of paper. The
letter, I may add, was registered. The publisher, being unable to make
anything of this, sent it on to me, and I submitted the blank sheets
to every possible chemical and heat test, with no result whatever.
Beyond the fact that the writing appeared to be that of a woman there
is nothing to add to this account. The matter was, and remains, an
insoluble mystery. How the correspondent could have something so secret
to say to Mr. Musgrave and yet not be aware that this person had been
dead for several years is very hard to understand--or why blank sheets
should be so carefully registered through the mail. I may add that I
did not trust the sheets to my own chemical tests, but had the best
expert advice without getting any result. Considered as a case it was a
failure--and a very tantalizing one.

Mr. Sherlock Holmes has always been a fair mark for practical
jokers, and I have had numerous bogus cases of various degrees of
ingenuity, marked cards, mysterious warnings, cypher messages, and
other curious communications. It is astonishing the amount of trouble
which some people will take with no object save a mystification. Upon
one occasion, as I was entering the hall to take part in an amateur
billiard competition, I was handed by the attendant a small packet
which had been left for me. Upon opening it I found a piece of ordinary
green chalk such as is used in billiards. I was amused by the incident,
and I put the chalk into my waistcoat pocket and used it during the
game. Afterward, I continued to use it until one day, some months
later, as I rubbed the tip of my cue the face of the chalk crumbled
in, and I found it was hollow. From the recess thus exposed I drew out
a small slip of paper with the words “From Arsene Lupin to Sherlock
Holmes.”

Imagine the state of mind of the joker who took such trouble to
accomplish such a result.

One of the mysteries submitted to Mr. Holmes was rather upon the
psychic plane and therefore beyond his powers. The facts as alleged are
most remarkable, though I have no proof of their truth save that the
lady wrote earnestly and gave both her name and address. The person,
whom we will call Mrs. Seagrave, had been given a curious secondhand
ring, snake-shaped, and dull gold. This she took from her finger at
night. One night she slept with it on and had a fearsome dream in which
she seemed to be pushing off some furious creature which fastened its
teeth into her arm. On awakening, the pain in the arm continued, and
next day the imprint of a double set of teeth appeared upon the arm,
with one tooth of the lower jaw missing. The marks were in the shape of
blue-black bruises which had not broken the skin.

[Illustration]

“I do not know,” says my correspondent, “what made me think the ring
had anything to do with the matter, but I took a dislike to the thing
and did not wear it for some months, when, being on a visit, I took to
wearing it again.” To make a long story short, the same thing happened,
and the lady settled the matter for ever by dropping her ring into
the hottest corner of the kitchen range. This curious story, which
I believe to be genuine, may not be as supernatural as it seems. It
is well known that in some subjects a strong mental impression does
produce a physical effect. Thus a very vivid nightmare dream with the
impression of a bite might conceivably produce the mark of a bite.
Such cases are well attested in medical annals. The second incident
would, of course, arise by unconscious suggestion from the first. None
the less, it is a very interesting little problem, whether psychic or
material.

Buried treasures are naturally among the problems which have come
to Mr. Holmes. One genuine case was accompanied by a diagram here
reproduced. It refers to an Indiaman which was wrecked upon the South
African coast in the year 1782. If I were a younger man, I should be
seriously inclined to go personally and look into the matter.

The ship contained a remarkable treasure, including, I believe, the
old crown regalia of Delhi. It is surmised that they buried these near
the coast, and that this chart is a note of the spot. Each Indiaman in
those days had its own semaphore code, and it is conjectured that the
three marks upon the left are signals from a three-armed semaphore.
Some record of their meaning might perhaps even now be found in the old
papers of the India Office. The circle upon the right gives the compass
bearings. The larger semi-circle may be the curved edge of a reef or of
a rock. The figures above are the indications how to reach the X which
marks the treasure. Possibly they may give the bearings as 186 feet
from the 4 upon the semi-circle. The scene of the wreck is a lonely
part of the country, but I shall be surprised if sooner or later, some
one does not seriously set to work to solve the mystery--indeed at the
present moment there is a small company working to that end.

I must now apologise for this digressive chapter and return to the
orderly sequence of my career.




CHAPTER XII

NORWOOD AND SWITZERLAND

 Psychic Research Society--Psychic Leanings--Literary Circles in
 London--Young Writers--Henry Irving--A Great Blow--Davos--“Brigadier
 Gerard”--Major Pond--American Lecturing in 1894--First
 Lecture--Anti-British Wave--Answer to Prayer.


The chief event of our Norwood life was the birth of my son Kingsley,
who lived to play a man’s part in the Great War, and who died shortly
after its conclusion. My own life was so busy that I had little time
for religious development, but my thoughts still ran much upon psychic
matters, and it was at this time that I joined the Psychical Research
Society, of which I am now one of the senior members. I had few psychic
experiences myself, and my material philosophy, as expressed in the
“Stark Munro Letters,” which were written just at the end of the
Norwood period, was so strong that it did not easily crumble. Yet as
year by year I read the wonderful literature of psychic science and
experience, I became more and more impressed by the strength of the
Spiritualist position and by the levity and want of all dignity and
accurate knowledge which characterized the attitude of their opponents.
The religious side of the matter had not yet struck me, but I felt
more and more that the case for the phenomena vouched for by such
men as Sir William Crookes, Barrett, Russel Wallace, Victor Hugo and
Zöllner was so strong that I could see no answer to their exact record
of observations. “It is incredible but it is true,” said Crookes, and
the aphorism seemed to exactly express my dawning convictions. I had a
weekly impulse from the psychic paper, “Light,” which has, I maintain,
during its long career and up to the present day, presented as much
brain to the square inch as any journal published in Great Britain.

My pleasant recollection of those days from 1880 to 1893 lay in my
first introduction, as a more or less rising author, to the literary
life of London. It is extraordinary to remember that at that time
there was a general jeremiad in the London press about the extinction
of English literature, and the assumed fact that there were no rising
authors to take the place of those who were gone. The real fact is that
there was a most amazing crop, all coming up simultaneously, presenting
perhaps no Dickens or Thackeray, but none the less so numerous and many
sided and with so high an average of achievement that I think they
would match for varied excellence any similar harvest in our literary
history. It was during the years roughly from 1888 to 1893 that Rudyard
Kipling, James Stephen Phillips, Watson, Grant Allen, Wells, Barrie,
Bernard Shaw, H. A. Jones, Pinero, Marie Corelli, Stanley Weyman,
Anthony Hope, Hall Caine, and a whole list of others were winning their
spurs. Many of these I met in the full flush of their youth and their
powers. Of some of them I will speak more fully later. As to the old
school they were certainly somewhat of a declension, and the newcomers
found no very serious opposition in gaining a hearing. Wilkie Collins,
Trollope, George Eliot and Charles Reade had passed. I have always been
a very great admirer of the last, who was really a great innovator as
well as a most dramatic writer, for it was he who first introduced
realism and founded his stories upon carefully arranged documents. He
was the literary father of Zola. George Eliot has never appealed to me
much, for I like my effects in a less leisurely fashion; but Trollope
also I consider to be a very original writer, though I fancy he
traces his ancestry through Jane Austen. No writer is ever absolutely
original. He always joins at some point onto that old tree of which he
is a branch.

Of the literary men whom I met at that time my most vivid recollections
are of the group who centred round the new magazine, “The Idler,” which
had been started by Jerome K. Jerome, who had deservedly shot into fame
with his splendidly humorous “Three Men in a Boat.” It has all the
exuberance and joy of life which youth brings with it, and even now if
I have ever time to be at all sad, which is seldom enough, I can laugh
away the shadows when I open that book. Jerome is a man who, like most
humorists, has a very serious side to his character, as all who have
seen “The Third Floor Back” will acknowledge, but he was inclined to be
hotheaded and intolerant in political matters, from pure earnestness of
purpose, which alienated some of his friends. He was associated in the
editorship of “The Idler” with Robert Barr, a volcanic Anglo- or rather
Scot-American, with a violent manner, a wealth of strong adjectives,
and one of the kindest of natures underneath it all. He was one of
the best raconteurs I have ever known, and as a writer I have always
felt that he did not quite come into his own. George Burgin, like some
quaint gentle character from Dickens, was the sub-editor, and Barrie,
Zangwill, and many other rising men were among the contributors who
met periodically at dinner. I was not unfaithful to “The Strand,” but
there were some contributions which they did not need, and with these I
established my connection with “The Idler.” It was at this time and in
this way that I met James Barrie, of whom I shall have more to say when
I come to that chapter which treats of some eminent and interesting men
whom I have known.

Two isolated facts stand out in my memory during that time at Norwood.
One was that there seemed to be an imminent danger of war with France
and that I applied for the Mediterranean war-correspondentship of
the “Central News,” guessing that the chief centre of activity and
interest would be in that quarter. I got the appointment and was all
ready to start, but fortunately the crisis passed. The second was my
first venture in the drama. I had written a short story called “A
Straggler of ’15,” which had seemed to me to be a moving picture of
an old soldier and his ways. My own eyes were moist as I wrote it and
that is the surest way to moisten those of others. I now turned this
into a one-act play, and, greatly daring, I sent it to Henry Irving, of
whose genius I had been a fervent admirer ever since those Edinburgh
days when I had paid my sixpence for the gallery night after night to
see him in “Hamlet” and “The Lyons Mail.” To my great delight I had a
pleasing note from Bram Stoker, the great man’s secretary, offering me
£100 for the copyright. It was a good bargain for him, for it is not
too much to say that Corporal Gregory Brewster became one of his stock
parts and it had the enormous advantage that the older he got the more
naturally he played it. The house laughed and sobbed, exactly as I had
done when I wrote it. Several critics went out of their way to explain
that the merit lay entirely with the great actor and had nothing to do
with the indifferent play, but as a matter of fact the last time I saw
it acted it was by a real corporal from a military camp in the humble
setting of a village hall and it had exactly the same effect upon the
audience which Irving produced at the Lyceum. So perhaps there was
something in writing after all, and certainly every stage effect was
indicated in the manuscript. I would add that with his characteristic
largeness in money matters Irving always sent me a guinea for each
performance in spite of his purchase of the copyright. Henry Irving the
son carried on the part and played it, in my opinion, better than the
father. I can well remember the flush of pleasure on his face when I
uttered the word “better” and how he seized my hand. I have no doubt
it was trying for his great powers to be continually belittled by
their measurement with those of his giant father, to whom he bore so
remarkable a physical resemblance. His premature death was a great loss
to the stage, as was that of his brother Lawrence, drowned with his
wife in the great Canadian river of the same name as himself.

I now come to the great misfortune which darkened and deflected our
lives. I have said that my wife and I had taken a tour in Switzerland.
I do not know whether she had over-taxed herself in this excursion,
or whether we encountered microbes in some inn bedroom, but the fact
remains that within a few weeks of our return she complained of pain
in her side and cough. I had no suspicion of anything serious, but
sent for the nearest good physician. To my surprise and alarm he told
me when he descended from the bedroom that the lungs were very gravely
affected, that there was every sign of rapid consumption and that he
thought the case a most serious one with little hope, considering her
record and family history, of a permanent cure. With two children, aged
four and one, and a wife who was in such deadly danger, the situation
was a difficult one. I confirmed the diagnosis by having Sir Douglas
Powell down to see her, and I then set all my energy to work to save
the situation. The home was abandoned, the newly bought furniture was
sold, and we made for Davos in the High Alps where there seemed the
best chance of killing this accursed microbe which was rapidly eating
out her vitals.

And we succeeded. When I think that the attack was one of what is
called “galloping consumption,” and that the doctors did not give more
than a few months, and yet that we postponed the fatal issue from 1893
to 1906, I think it is proof that the successive measures were wise.
The invalid’s life was happy too, for it was necessarily spent in
glorious scenery. It was seldom marred by pain, and it was sustained
by that optimism which is peculiar to the disease, and which came
naturally to her quietly contented nature.

As there were no particular social distractions at Davos, and as our
life was bounded by the snow and fir which girt us in, I was able to
devote myself to doing a good deal of work and also to taking up with
some energy the winter sports for which the place is famous. Whilst
there I began the Brigadier Gerard series of stories, founded largely
upon that great book, “The Memoirs of General Marbot.” This entailed
a great deal of research into Napoleonic days, and my military detail
was, I think, very accurate--so much so that I had a warm letter of
appreciation from Archibald Forbes, the famous war correspondent, who
was himself a great Napoleonic and military student. Before the end of
the winter we were assured that the ravages of the disease had been
checked. I dared not return to England, however, for fear of a relapse,
so with the summer we moved on to Maloja, another health resort at the
end of the Engadine valley, and there we endeavoured to hold all we had
won--which, with occasional relapses, we succeeded in doing.

My sister Lottie, free at last from the work which she had so bravely
done, had now joined us. Connie, the younger sister, had come back from
Portugal earlier, and had joined us at Norwood, where she had met and
eventually married E. W. Hornung the novelist. Of Hornung I will speak
later. In the meantime Lottie’s presence and the improvement of the
invalid, which was so marked that no sudden crisis was thought at all
possible, gave me renewed liberty of action. Before the catastrophe
occurred I had given some lectures on literature at home, and the work
with its movement and bustle was not distasteful to me. Now I was
strongly pressed to go to America on the same errand, and in the late
autumn of 1894 I set out on this new adventure.

My brother Innes, he who had shared my first days in Southsea, had
since passed through Richmond Public School, and afterwards the
Woolwich Academy, so that he was now just emerging as a subaltern. As
I needed some companion, and as I thought that the change would do him
good, I asked him to come with me to the States. We crossed on the
ill-fated German liner _Elbe_, which a very short time afterwards was
sunk in collision with a collier in the North Sea. Already I observed
evidence of that irrational hatred of the British which in the course
of twenty years was to lead to so terrific a result involving the
destruction of the German Empire. I remember that on some fête day
on board, the saloon was thickly decorated with German and American
flags without one single British one, though a fair proportion of
the passengers were British. Innes and I then and there drew a Union
Jack and stuck it up aloft, where its isolation drew attention to our
grievance.

Major Pond was my impresario in America, and a quaint character he was.
He seemed the very personification of his country, huge, loose limbed,
straggling, with a goat’s beard and a nasal voice. He had fought in the
Civil War and been mixed up with every historical American event of his
lifetime.

He was a good, kind fellow and we formed a friendship which was never
broken. He met us in the docks, and carried us off to a little hotel
beside the Aldine Club, a small literary club, in which we had our
meals.

I have treated America and my impression of that amazing and perplexing
country in later pages of these memoirs, when I visited it under more
detached conditions. At present it was all hard work with little
time for general observations. Pond had fixed me up a pretty hard
schedule, but on the other hand I had bargained to get back to Davos
in time to spend Christmas with my wife, so that there was a limit
to my servitude. My first reading was given in a fashionable Baptist
Church, which was the usual launching slip for Pond’s new lecturers.
We had walked from the retiring room and were just coming in sight of
the audience when I felt something tickle my ear. I put up my hand and
found that my collar was undone, my tie had fallen off, and my stud,
the first cause of all the trouble, had disappeared. Standing there,
on the edge of the platform, Pond dragged out his own stud. I replaced
everything, and sailed on quite as I should be, while Pond retired to
refit. It is strange, and possibly more than coincidence, how often one
is prevented at the last moment from making some foolish appearance in
public.

The readings went very well and the audience was generous in applause.
I have my own theory of reading, which is that it should be entirely
disassociated from acting and should be made as natural and also as
audible as possible. Such a presentment is, I am sure, the less tiring
for an audience. Indeed I read to them exactly as in my boyhood I used
to read to my mother. I gave extracts from recent British authors,
including some work of my own, and as I mixed up the grave and the gay
I was able to keep them mildly entertained for an hour. Some papers
maintained that I could not read at all, but I think that what they
really meant was that I did not act at all. Others seemed to endorse my
method. Anyhow I had an excellent first reception and Pond told me that
he lay smiling all night after it. He had no difficulty afterwards in
booking as many engagements as he could fit into the time. I visited
every town of any size between Boston in the north and Washington in
the south, while Chicago and Milwaukee marked my western limit.

Sometimes I found that it took me all my time to fit in the
engagements, however fast I might travel. Once, for example, I lectured
at Daly’s Theatre in New York at a matinée, at Princeton College the
same evening, some 50 miles away, and at Philadelphia next afternoon.
It was no wonder that I got very tired--the more so as the exuberant
hospitality in those pre-prohibition days was enough in itself to take
the energies out of the visitor. It was all done in kindness, but it
was dangerous for a man who had his work to do. I had one little break
when I paid a pleasant visit to Rudyard Kipling, of which I shall
speak later. Bar those few days I was going hard all the time, and it
is no wonder that I was so tired out that I kept to my bunk most of the
way from New York to Liverpool.

My memories are the confused ones of a weary man. I recall one amusing
incident when as I bustled on to the stage at Daly’s Theatre I tripped
over the wooden sill of the stage door, with the result that I came
cantering down the sloping stage towards the audience, shedding books
and papers on my way. There was much laughter and a general desire for
an encore.

Our visit was marred by one of those waves of anti-British feeling
which sweep occasionally over the States, and which emanate from their
own early history, every grievance being exaggerated and inflamed by
the constant hostility of Irish pressmen and politicians. It all seems
very absurd and contemptible to the travelling Briton, because he is
aware how entirely one-sided it is, and how welcome, for example,
is the American flag in every British public display. This was not
known by the home-staying American, and probably he imagined that his
own country was treated as rudely by us as ours by his. The Dunraven
yacht race had given additional acerbity to this chronic ill-feeling,
and it was very active at the time of our visit. I remember that a
banquet was given to us at a club at Detroit at which the wine flowed
freely, and which ended by a speech by one of our hosts in which he
bitterly attacked the British Empire. My brother and I, with one or
two Canadians who were present, were naturally much affronted, but we
made every allowance for the lateness of the evening. I asked leave,
however, to reply to the speech, and some of those who were present
have assured me that they have never forgotten what I said. In the
course of my remarks I said: “You Americans have lived up to now within
your own palings, and know nothing of the real world outside. But now
your land is filled up, and you will be compelled to mix more with
the other nations. When you do so you will find that there is only
one which can at all understand your ways and your aspirations, or
will have the least sympathy. That is the mother country which you are
now so fond of insulting. She is an Empire, and you will soon be an
Empire also, and only then will you understand each other, and you will
realize that you have only one real friend in the world.” It was only
two or three years later that there came the Cuban war, the episode of
Manila Bay where the British Commander joined up with the Americans
against the Germans, and several other incidents which proved the truth
of my remarks.

A writer of average income is bound to lose pecuniarily upon a lecture
tour, even in America, unless he prolongs it very much and works very
hard indeed. By losing I do not mean that he is actually out of pocket,
but that he could have earned far more if he had never gone outside
his own study. In my own case I found after our joint expenses were
paid that there was about £1,000 over. The disposal of this money
furnished a curious example of the power of prayer, which, as Mr. S.
S. McClure has already narrated it, I have no delicacy in telling. He
tells how he was endeavouring to run his magazine, how he was down to
his last farthing, how he dropped on his knees on the office floor to
pray for help, and how on the same day an Englishman who was a mere
acquaintance walked into the office, and said: “McClure, I believe in
you and in the future of your magazine,” and put down £1,000 on the
table. A critic might perhaps observe that under such circumstances
to sell 1,000 shares at face value was rather hard upon the ignorant
and trusting buyer. For a long time I could clearly see the workings
of Providence as directed towards Sam McClure, but could not quite
get their perspective as regards myself, but I am bound to admit that
in the long run, after many vicissitudes, the deal was justified both
ways, and I was finally able to sell my holding twenty years later at a
reasonable advance. The immediate result, however, was that I returned
to Davos with all my American earnings locked up, and with no actual
visible result of my venture.

The Davos season was in full blast when I returned, and my wife was
holding her own well. It was at this time, in the early months of 1895,
that I developed ski-running in Switzerland as described in my chapter
on Sport. We lingered late at Davos, so late that I was able to lay out
a golf course, which was hampered in its start by the curious trick the
cows had of chewing up the red flags. From Davos we finally moved to
Caux, over the lake of Geneva, where for some months I worked steadily
at my writing. With the autumn I visited England, leaving the ladies
at Caux, and it was then that events occurred which turned our road of
life to a new angle.
